                              United States Department of Agriculture




Urban Tree Database and
Allometric Equations
E. Gregory McPherson, Natalie S. van Doorn, and Paula J. Peper




                               Forest            Pacific Southwest      General Technical Report   October
                         RE    Service           Research Station       PSW-GTR-253                2016
DE PA
  RT                   TU
        MENT OF AGRI C U L
In accordance with Federal civil rights law and U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)
civil rights regulations and policies, the USDA, its Agencies, offices, and employees, and
institutions participating in or administering USDA programs are prohibited from discriminating
based on race, color, national origin, religion, sex, gender identity (including gender
expression), sexual orientation, disability, age, marital status, family/parental status, income
derived from a public assistance program, political beliefs, or reprisal or retaliation for prior
civil rights activity, in any program or activity conducted or funded by USDA (not all bases
apply to all programs). Remedies and complaint filing deadlines vary by program or incident.
Persons with disabilities who require alternative means of communication for program
information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, American Sign Language, etc.) should
contact the responsible Agency or USDA’s TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and
TTY) or contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339. Additionally,
program information may be made available in languages other than English.
To file a program discrimination complaint, complete the USDA Program Discrimination
Complaint Form, AD-3027, found online at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html
and at any USDA office or write a letter addressed to USDA and provide in the letter all of the
information requested in the form. To request a copy of the complaint form, call (866) 632-9992.
Submit your completed form or letter to USDA by: (1) mail: U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington,
D.C. 20250-9410; (2) fax: (202) 690-7442; or (3) email: program.intake@usda.gov.
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, employer, and lender.




Authors
E. Gregory McPherson is a research forester, 1731 Research Park Dr., Davis,
CA 95618; Natalie S. van Doorn is a research urban ecologist, 800 Buchanan St.,
Albany, CA 94710; Paula J. Peper is an urban ecologist (retired), 1731 Research
Park Dr., Davis, CA 95618.

Cover photos: top—Mature street trees frame a view down a residential street in
Bismarck, North Dakota. Bottom right—Young street trees shade a sidewalk and
parked cars in Glendale, Arizona. Bottom left—Street and front yard trees join
to provide continuous shade in this Indianapolis, Indiana, neighborhood. (Photos
courtesy of Pacific Southwest Research Station.)
Abstract
McPherson, E. Gregory; van Doorn, Natalie S.; Peper, Paula J. 2016. Urban
 Tree Database and Allometric Equations. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-235.
 Albany, CA: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest
 Research Station. 86 p.

Information on urban tree growth underpins models used to calculate the effects
of trees on the environment and human well-being. Maximum tree size and other
growth data are used by urban forest managers, landscape architects, and planners
to select trees most suitable to the amount of growing space, thereby reducing costly
future conflicts between trees and infrastructure. Growth data are used to examine
relationships between growth and influencing factors such as site conditions and
stewardship practices. Despite the importance of tree growth data to the science
and practice of urban forestry, our knowledge in this area is scant. Over a period of
14 years, scientists with the U.S. Forest Service Pacific Southwest Research Station
recorded data from a consistent set of measurements on over 14,000 trees in 17 U.S.
cities. Key information collected for each tree species includes bole and crown size,
location, and age. From this Urban Tree Database, 365 sets of tree growth equations
were developed for the 171 distinct species. Appendices contain field data collection
protocols, foliar biomass data that are fundamental to calculating leaf area, tree
biomass equations for carbon storage estimates, and a user guide that illustrates
application of the equations to calculate carbon stored over many years for tree
species that were measured in multiple cities. An online database at http://dx.doi.
org/10.2737/RDS-2016-0005 includes the raw data, growth equations, coefficients,
and application information for each species’ volume and dry-weight-biomass
equations for urban and rural forest trees; and an expanded list of biomass density
factors for common urban tree species.
    Keywords: Allometry, growth models, predictive equations, tree growth,
urban trees.
Contents
 1   Chapter 1: Introduction
 1   Uses of Urban Tree Growth Equations
 4   Development of Urban Tree Growth Equations
 6   Origin of These Urban Tree Growth Equations
 8   Limitations of Urban Tree Growth Equations
11   Foliar Biomass
12   Woody Biomass
15   Chapter 2: Sampling Design and Data Collection
15   Climate Zones and Reference Cities
17   Species and Tree Sampling
18   Tree Data Collection
22   Foliar Sampling and Data Collection
23   Chapter 3: Development of Tree Growth Equations
25   Database Description
26   Data Limitations and Future Research Needs
29   Chapter 4: Conclusions
30   Acknowledgments
30   English Equivalents
31   References
38   Appendix 1: Trees Sampled by Species and Region
48   Appendix 2: Field Data Collection Protocols
56   Appendix 3: Foliar Biomass
64   Appendix 4: Growth Equation Coefficients and Application Information
68   Appendix 5: User Guide
68   Calculating Bole Diameter and Height, Crown Dimensions, and Leaf Area
69 Estimating Dry-Weight Biomass and Carbon
80 Error in Predicting Future Growth, Carbon, and Biomass
80 Case Study
                                                                         Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Chapter 1: Introduction
Tree size and age influence management costs and ecosystem services derived from
urban trees. Urban forest researchers have developed allometric equations for trees
in urban environments, but their range of application and predictive power are lim-
ited owing to small sample sizes, few species, young trees only, excellent-condition
trees only, and narrow geographic region. This research overcomes many of these
limitations. Based on measurements of 14,487 urban street and park trees, an Urban
Tree Database (UTD) was constructed. From the UTD, 365 sets of allometric equa-
tions were developed for tree species from around the United States. Each “set”
consists of eight equations for each of the approximately 20 most abundant species
in each of 16 climate regions. Tree age is used to predict species diameter at breast
height (d.b.h.), and d.b.h. is used to predict tree height, crown diameter, crown
height, and leaf area. Diameter at breast height is also used to predict age. For
applications with remote sensing, average crown diameter is used to predict d.b.h.
There are 171 distinct species represented within this database. Some species grow
in more than one region and tend to grow differently from one region to another
owing to environmental and management differences. Thus, there are multiple
equations for the same species that reflect those differences, and it is important to
select the equation for the appropriate region. The UTD contains foliar biomass
data that are fundamental to calculating leaf area, as well as tree biomass equations
for carbon storage estimates. Also, a user guide illustrates application of the equa-
tions to calculate carbon stored over many years for tree species that were measured
in multiple cities. The raw data and equations may be accessed and downloaded at
http://dx.doi.org/10.2737/RDS-2016-0005.

Uses of Urban Tree Growth Equations
Information on urban tree growth is indispensable to modeling urban forest
function and value. The economic, social, and ecological benefits of trees are
directly related to their size, as indicated by leaf area, crown volume, and bio-
mass (Scott et al. 1998, Stoff berg et al. 2010, Xiao et al. 2000a). Growth equa-
tions underpin the calculations produced by many computer models used in
urban forestry, such as i-Tree, National Tree Benefit Calculator, OpenTreeMap,
and ecoSmart Landscapes (fig. 1).
     Urban tree growth and size data can assist municipal foresters because the
costs for pruning and removing trees tends to increase with tree size (O’Brien et
al. 1992). For example, accurate projections of size-related costs for pruning spe-
cies that require frequent care can improve budgeting. Sanders et al. (2013) noted
that managers are hindered in developing tree removal and replacement plans and
obtaining public acceptance when they lack empirical data on each species’ useful

                                                                                                                   1
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                                                                                                                        i-Tree.org




                          Figure 1—Computer programs such as i-Tree use tree growth equations when calculating annual
                          carbon dioxide sequestration by trees.



                          service life. Without maximum size end points that are linked to constraints posed
                          by the designed space, it is difficult to plan for phased removal and replacement that
                          minimizes liability and maintains continuous tree canopy cover.
                               Knowledge of maximum tree size can inform tree selection to avoid conflicts
                          between tree roots and nearby sidewalks or between crowns and utility lines
                          (Randrup et al. 2001). Conversely, field-based predictions of crown projection area
                          at 10, 15, and 20 years after planting can help designers select species to achieve
                          targeted tree canopy cover in parking lots (McPherson 2001). Other examples of
                          design and management issues influenced by tree growth and size include spacing
                          between trees and in relation to building infrastructure, soil volumes required,
                          irrigation demands, and pest-control and fertilization dosages (fig. 2). A better
                          understanding of tree allometry by landscape architects and arborists can poten-
                          tially reduce management costs, improve functional performance, and increase the
                          benefits derived from healthy and sustainable urban forests (Clark et al. 1997).
                               Allometric equations that describe the bole and crown growth of different urban
                          tree species can be used to create more realistic animations that compress years of
                          growth into seconds (Peper et al. 2007). Landscape architects and planners are
                          increasingly using three-dimensional models to visualize alternative landscapes (fig.
                          3). Incorporating empirically derived allometric equations to simulate development of
                          the tree canopy can allow designers to anticipate spatial impacts and potential conflicts
                          between maturing trees and other design elements (Larsen and Kristoffersen 2002).

2
                                                                                                       Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




                                                    Pacific Southwest Research Station




                                                                        Figure 2—Urban tree growth equations can
                                                                        be used to estimate the maximum trunk
                                                                        diameter of different aged trees to help
                                                                        managers reduce infrastructure repair costs.




Figure 3—Tree growth equations underpin three-dimensional models that are used to visualize the
spatial and economic impacts of alternative landscapes. (Linsen et al. 2005)

                                                                                                                                                 3
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                              Analyses of allometric and site data can find correlations between variables that
                          will inform management (Grabosky and Gilman 2004). Moreover, tree size and age
                          data can be used to form local baselines for cities. Repeated measurements of the
                          same trees can identify trends in growth, survival, and replacement. By building
                          upon these baseline data, long-term tree growth and demographic studies could fill
                          important knowledge gaps in urban forestry.

                          Development of Urban Tree Growth Equations
                          Although tree growth is the result of very complex processes, growth equations
                          capture changes in tree size with age in a surprisingly simple and accurate way.
                          Growth equations contain two components that reflect the interaction of two oppos-
                          ing biological forces. The expansion component is responsible for the increase in
                          the increment with age, and growth expansion is proportional to the current size of
                          the tree (Zeide 1993). The growth-decline component is responsible for the decrease
                          in the increment with age from constraints imposed by internal (aging) and external
                          (stress) factors. Hence, growth equations bring together these two biological forces
                          over the entire lifespan of a species. Because tree growth reflects the unique genetic
                          traits of trees, as well as their responses to environmental trends and management,
                          no one growth equation suits all species, sites, or growth processes. Growth equa-
                          tions are best applied when the scope of analysis includes many individual trees
                          over long time periods.
                               Growth equations are traditionally associated with rural forests, where they
                          provide quantitative guidelines for planting, thinning, and harvesting. Growth equa-
                          tions for forest trees may not be directly transferable to open-grown urban trees
                          because they grow and partition bole, branch, twig, and leaf biomass differently
                          (Anderegg et al. 2015, Nowak 1994a, Peper and McPherson 1998) (fig. 4). For
                          example, in forests, tree crowns compete for limited space and may not reach their
                          maximum expansion potential (Martin et al. 2012).
                               The development of allometric equations for urban open-grown trees has
                          been sporadic. Fleming (1988) measured trees in New Jersey having full healthy
                          crowns to develop linear relationships between d.b.h., height, crown spread,
                          and age. Frelich (1992) measured only healthy trees (12 species, 221 trees total)
                          growing in Minneapolis and St. Paul, Minnesota, to predict linear size relation-
                          ships. Nowak (1994b) developed an allometric equation for leaf area based on
                          data from park trees in Chicago. Tree dimensions and leaf area were predicted




4
                                                                                     Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pacific Southwest Research Station




Figure 4—The form of red maple trees (Acer rubrum) can vary from relatively upright in forest stands (left) (Zimmerman 2011) to
spreading when growing in the open (right).



for the most abundant street tree species in Modesto and Santa Monica, Califor-
nia (Peper et al. 2001a, 2001b). In New Haven, Connecticut, Troxel et al. (2013)
developed allometric equations for predicting d.b.h. from age and height, crown
diameter, and crown volume from d.b.h. for early growth (15 years) of 10 street
tree species.
     Outside of North America, growth equations have been developed for
street-side Tilia species in Copenhagen, Denmark (Larsen and Kristoffersen
2002), and T. cordata Mill., Fraxinus excelsior L. and Aesculus hippocastanum
L. in Warsaw, Poland (Lukaszkiewicz and Kosmala 2008, Lukaszkiewicz et al.
2005). Predictive models were developed from allometric data for five street
tree species in northeastern Italy by Semenzato et al. (2011). Stoff berg et al.
(2008) used allometric relationships between age and d.b.h., height, and crown
diameter to estimate dimensions at 10, 15, and 30 years after planting for three                                                             25

                                                                                                                                                               Cheyenne




street tree species in Tshwane, South Africa. The allometric equations from all
                                                                                                                                                               Ft. Collins                                                     20.5 m
                                                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                 Crown base and height (m)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   100%

                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                  15.9 m


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    55%




these studies reflect the effects of local site conditions, management practices,
                                                                                                                                             10


                                                                                                                                                                                  8.8 m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13.7 m
                                                                                                                                              5



                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                  0   5   10    15    20     25   30      35   40   45   50   55    60    65   70    75      80




and growing season on growth, limiting application outside their region of
                                                                                                                                                                                   Years after planting




origin (fig. 5).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                                                        25

                                                                          Cheyenne
                                                                          Ft. Collins                                                     20.5 m
                                                        20




                            Crown base and height (m)
                                                                                                                              100%

                                                        15
                                                                                             15.9 m


                                                                                                                               55%
                                                        10


                                                                                             8.8 m
                                                                                                                                               13.7 m
                                                         5



                                                         0
                                                             0   5   10    15    20     25   30      35   40   45   50   55    60    65   70    75      80
                                                                                              Years after planting

                          Figure 5—Urban tree growth modeling has shown how crown dimensions for trees of the same age
                          and species can vary due to differences in climate and management practices (McPherson and Peper
                          2012). Upper and lower lines represent height and height to first branch, respectively. Cheyenne green
                          ash (Fraxinus pennsylvanica) have 55 percent of the Fort Collins’ ash leaf area after 60 years.




                          Origin of These Urban Tree Growth Equations
                          For this report, the need to develop urban tree growth equations was first
                          prompted by a grant that required calculating the 40-year annual stream of carbon
                          stored by urban trees across the United States (McPherson and Simpson 1999).
                          Measured data were lacking for most regions. Following Frelich (1992), d.b.h. was
                          predicted using a power function with age and two constants (fig. 6). Coefficients
                          were adjusted for different regions based on the number of frost-free days, and
                          calibrated with the few data points that were available. This absence of reliable
                          data led the U.S. Forest Service to undertake a 14-year campaign that measured
                          more than 14,000 trees in cities across the United States. Crews began systemati-
                          cally sampling street and park trees in 1998. The initial tree growth equations
                          were used with numerical models to calculate the annual stream of benefits
                          associated with energy effects, air pollutant uptake and emissions, carbon storage,
                          rainfall interception, and effects on property values (Maco and McPherson 2003,
                          McPherson et al. 2005).




6
                                                                                                   Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




                                       35

                                                North     Central   South         Minn-ash
                                       30       NJ-ash    Sac-ash   NJ-plane      Sac-plane




  Diameter at breast height (inches)
                                       25


                                       20


                                       15


                                       10


                                       5


                                       0
                                            0            10             20                    30          40
                                                                    Age (years)

Figure 6—Initial efforts to model tree growth to calculate carbon storage were limited by a scarcity
of measured data (McPherson and Simpson 1999).



    This work evolved into the i-Tree Streets (formerly STRATUM) software
program and a series of related products that are highlighted below.
• Sixteen regional tree guides quantified the long-term benefits and costs
    for trees and provided information on program design and implementa-
    tion, optimal configurations of trees, tree species for different situations,
    techniques for successful establishment of new trees, and sources of fund-
    ing and technical assistance. These technical reports provide regionally
    specific science-based information for elected officials, planners, land-
    scape architects and contractors, urban foresters, arborists, and nonprofit
    tree organizations (McPherson et al. 2000, 2010; Peper et al. 2009; Vargas
    et al. 2007) (http://www.fs.fed.us/psw/topics/urban_forestry/products/
    tree_guides.shtml).
• Seventeen municipal forest resource assessments combined results of
    citywide street/park tree inventories with benefit-cost modeling to describe
                           structure, function, and value, along with resource management needs
                           (McPherson and Simpson 2002, McPherson et al. 1999) (http://www.fs.fed.
                           us/psw/topics/urban_forestry/products/mfra.shtml).



                                                                                                                                             7
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                          •   Trees in Our City PowerPoint presentations (http://www.fs.fed.us/
                              psw/topics/urban_forestry/TreesInOurCity/index.shtml) and Trees Pay
                              Us Back brochures (http://www.fs.fed.us/psw/topics/urban_forestry/
                              products/treebrochures.shtml) translated regional results into customized
                              images and figures for audiences such as city councils and homeowners
                              (McPherson et al. 2011).

                              In 2008, the U.S. Forest Service Pacific Southwest Research Station received
                          funding from CAL FIRE to develop a tree carbon calculator to predict carbon
                          stored by tree planting, following guidance in the Urban Forest Greenhouse Gas
                          Reporting Protocol (Climate Action Reserve 2008). The Center for Urban Forestry
                          Research (CUFR) Tree Carbon Calculator was released in 2010 and incorporated
                          revised tree growth equations for the most abundant tree species in each of 16 U.S.
                          climate zones (http://www.fire.ca.gov/resource_mgt/resource_mgt_urbanforestry).
                               This report presents the third, most recent and most complete sets of growth
                          equations. The equations presented in this report were developed using more
                          sophisticated statistical methods than before. For example, in the first studies,
                          logarithmic regression and exponential models predominantly provided the best
                          fits to measured data (Peper et al. 2001a, 2001b). In these equations, the best
                          model fits ranged from polynomials (from simple linear to quartic) to logarithmic
                          and exponential models (Peper et al. 2014). The newest equations have been
                          integrated with numerical models of tree benefits in the ecoSmart Landscapes
                          software (McPherson et al. 2014).

                          Limitations of Urban Tree Growth Equations
                          The biophysical, social, and economic forces that influence tree growth are highly
                          variable within and among cities. Consequently, large sample sizes are required to
                          fully capture overall growth trends within a species. In rural forests, relatively uniform
                          growing conditions allow foresters to create site indices and generate site-specific
                          growth equations for each species in the stand. This has not been done for trees in the
                          urban forest because of their heterogeneity and limited resources for measurements.
                               Management practices can differ widely among the arborists and amateurs who
                          plant and maintain trees. For example, pruning practices such as topping trees to
                          reduce their height can affect tree growth and size (fig. 7). Crown damage from
                          storms, pests, drought, and other stressors can result in highly variable height and
                          diameter dimensions among trees of the same species and age. The presence of
                          trees with dimensions that deviate from the norm can result in growth equations
                          that produce less reliable size predictions.


8
                                                                                   Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




                                                                                                 Pacific Southwest Research Station




Figure 7—Tree management practices, especially pruning, can affect crown size. The two Chinese
elms (Ulmus parvifolia) before (above) and after (below) pruning in Claremont, California.




                                                                                                                                      9
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                               Another limitation to the development of robust growth equations for urban
                          trees is the difficulty of obtaining accurate age data for older trees. In the context of
                          this research, tree age refers to years after planting, not after germination or propa-
                          gation. Records of planting dates seldom extend beyond 30 to 40 years. Similarly,
                          detecting the presence and size of individual trees using high-resolution aerial
                          imagery becomes difficult prior to 1990. As a result, predictions of urban tree
                          dimensions reflect the increasing uncertainty about true tree age compounded by
                          naturally increasing variability associated with aging (fig. 8).
                               Allometric equations for urban tree species have many valuable uses. Although
                          researchers have developed such equations, their range of application and predictive
                          power are limited by small sample sizes, few species, young and excellent-condition
                          trees only, and narrow geographic range. This research overcomes some of these
                          limitations by presenting 365 sets of allometric equations for the most abundant tree




                                                            FRPE: Linear Adj R2 = 0.0880
                                                                Weight = 1 /d.b.h.ˆ2

                                             20




                                             15




                            Crown diameter
                                             10




                                              5




                                                  0        20                 40                 60                80
                                                                   Diameter at breast height

                          Figure 8—Tree crown measurements typically reflect increased variability with age. In this scatter
                          plot of green ash diameter at breast height (d.b.h.) (in centimeters) and crown-diameter data
                          (in meters) the variability is greatest for trees with d.b.h. in the 20-to 60-cm range. Accordingly,
                          the prediction interval increases with d.b.h. size (Peper et al. 2014).


10
                                                                               Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




species in cities from around the United States. Also, this report illustrates appli-
cation of these growth equations by calculating the predicted amounts of carbon
dioxide stored over 50 years by the same species of trees growing in cities with
different climates, soils, and management practices.

Foliar Biomass
Accurate estimates of leaf area are fundamental to modeling physiological and func-
tional processes of urban forests. For example, the volume of rainfall intercepted
by a tree crown is related to the amount of leaf area as well as the foliage surface
saturation storage capacity, both of which are species dependent (Xiao et al. 2000b).
Leaf area is used to calculate dry deposition rates of air pollutants and emissions of
biogenic volatile organic compounds (BVOC) for different tree species (Benjamin
and Winer 1998). Hirabayashi et al. (2012) used a regression equation to estimate
leaf area that uses crown dimensions and a species-specific shade factor (Nowak
1996). Bottom-up modeling approaches such as this calculate interception, uptake,
and emissions of individual trees and scale-up these estimates to the region. This
approach allows for modeling future effects of different management strategies.
     The accuracy, precision, efficiency, and other practical considerations associ-
ated with four methods of estimating leaf area of open-grown urban trees were
evaluated with a completely destructive sample of 50 trees (Peper and McPherson
2003). The color digital image processing method was the only method to produce
estimates within 25 percent of mean true leaf area and meet additional requirements
for precision and efficient use in urban settings. The regression equation that is cur-
rently applied in the i-Tree Eco dry deposition model (Cabaraban et al. 2013, Nowak
et al. 2014) had the lowest correlation of the four approaches.
     Isoprene and other BVOC emission factors are important components of air quality
models because tree emissions can occur at levels that influence atmospheric composi-
tion (Geron et al. 2001). Isoprene emission rates of different plant species range from
<0.1 to >100 µg · m-2 · h-1. Species-specific emission factor data have been summarized
and measurement techniques detailed (Ortega et al. 2008). Allometric relationships
between leaf area, fresh and dry leaf weight make it possible to estimate values of these
important model parameters from measurements on a related parameter. For example,
emission factors are expressed in units for dry foliar weight (g-C · kg-1 · dry leaf day-1).
To scale-up the emission calculation to an entire tree, one can estimate its total dry
foliar weight if the kilogram of dry leaf to square meter leaf area is known, as well as
total tree leaf area. Similarly, if total tree foliar dry weight is unknown but the foliar
dry weight to fresh weight ratio is known, total tree foliar dry weight can be estimated
by sampling and weighing leaves in quadrats within the crown volume.

                                                                                                                        11
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                               The UTD described in this report contains allometric equations that can be used
                          to calculate tree leaf area by d.b.h. for selected species. Also, it contains species-spe-
                          cific ratios for foliar dry weight to fresh weight and dry weight to leaf area. The UTD
                          is the most extensive compilation of these ratios for urban trees published to date.

                          Woody Biomass
                          Tree species, wood density, moisture content, and size data (d.b.h. and height) are
                          used with biomass equations and other information (e.g., condition) to calculate tree
                          wood volume and stored carbon. Because wood densities and moisture contents can
                          vary within and among species, there is error associated with the use of average
                          values in allometric equations (Yoon et al. 2013). Volumetric equations calculate
                          the aboveground green wood volume of a tree using species d.b.h. and height. Total
                          biomass and carbon stored are estimated by converting green volume to dry weight
                          using density conversion factors, adding the biomass stored belowground, and
                          converting total biomass to carbon.
                               Direct equations, a second type of equation, yield the aboveground dry weight
                          of a tree, eliminating the need for density conversion factors. Direct equations are
                          very site specific, and they assume that wood density value does not change. This
                          is a limitation if the equations are to be applied across a variety of trees, sites, and
                          climate zones because wood density varies within a tree and by site. Our focus has
                          been on using volume equations and species-specific wood density factors obtained
                          from the Global Wood Density Database (Zanne et al. 2009). This allows the user to
                          select a volume equation from a species whose structure most resembles the struc-
                          ture of the subject tree, then apply the density factor for the subject tree’s species.
                               Destructive sampling methods used to develop biomass equations in forests
                          are occasionally used in urban forests, such as for Quercus virginiana Mill. and
                          Q. laurifolia Michx. in Florida (Timilsina et al. 2014). Pillsbury et al. (1998) took
                          nondestructive manual measurements of 15 species of street and park trees in
                          California. Terrestrial LiDAR was used to develop biomass equations for 11 species
                          in Fort Collins, Colorado (Lefsky and McHale 2008). A laser dendrometer was used
                          for measurements on the five most abundant street tree species in Daegu, Korea
                          (Yoon et al. 2013).
                               Application of forest-based biomass equations for tree species is less desirable
                          than applying urban-based equations because of differences in tree architecture
                          (McHale et al. 2009, Yoon et al. 2013). Nowak (1994c) recommended multiplying
                          forest-based equation results by a correction factor of 0.80 because they overesti-
                          mated actual biomass. However, McHale et al. (2007) found that standard applica-
                          tion of the correction factor may lead to underestimates of biomass at the city

12
                                                                        Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




scale. Yoon et al. (2013) found that the urban-based biomass equation for Zelkova
serrata (Thunb.) Makino produced estimates 4.7 to 6.0 times lower than one
from plantation-grown trees, but was similar to the equation for urban Zelkova in
California (Pillsbury et al. 1998). However, the allometric equations for open- and
plantation-grown Ginkgo biloba L. were similar, implying greater architectural and
genetic uniformity for this species.
     Urban general equations have been developed as an alternative to applying
species-specific equations when many species do not have an equation. Aguaron
and McPherson (2012) compiled urban general equations from 26 urban-based
equations that were species specific. They found that these direct general equa-
tions underestimated carbon storage relative to species-specific equations at the
city scale. Differences between the structure of the species used to generate the
urban general equations and the city’s tree population may be responsible. Yoon
et al. (2013) compiled species-specific urban equations into a general equation and
found that the difference in values estimated using species-specific values was less
than 1 percent at the citywide scale. However, Aguaron and McPherson’s (2012)
general equation for urban broadleaf species overestimated aboveground biomass
by 50 percent. The uncertainty associated with application of urban general equa-
tions underscores the need for more urban equations that are species specific. For
improved accuracy, the urban general equations in this UTD are volume equations
that allow users to apply species-specific dry weight density factors.




                                                                                                                 13
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




14
                                                                                    Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Chapter 2: Sampling Design and Data Collection
Climate Zones and Reference Cities
The United States was divided into 16 national climate zones by aggregation of
45 Sunset climate zones (Brenzel 1997). The climate zone map demarcates each
zone (fig. 9). Sunset zones were aggregated based on factors that influence plant
distribution, such as length of growing season and minimum temperature, as well
as cooling degree days (CDD) and heating degree days (HDD), which are indica-
tors of the potential effects of trees on building heating and cooling loads (table
1). The CDD and HDD values are the summation of degrees of the average
temperature per day above and below 18.5 °C (65 °F) for the year, respectively
(McPherson 2010).




Figure 9—Climate zones were aggregated from 45 Sunset climate zones into 16 zones. Each zone has a reference city where tree growth
data were collected. Sacramento, California, was added as a second reference city (with Modesto) to the Inland Valleys zone.




                                                                                                                                 15
16   Table 1—Information on the reference city in each climate zone

                                                                                                                             USDA
                                                                   Years data        Reference                              hardiness                                             Annual
     Climate zone (code)                 Reference city             collected        city code        Sunset zones a         zonesb             CDDc              HDDc          precipitation
                                                                                                                                                                                 Millimeters
     Central Florida (CenFla)            Orlando, FL                   2008              ORL           26                      9-10              1,806              289             1367
     Coastal Plain (GulfCo)              Charleston, SC                2004              CHS           27, 28                  8-9               1,124            1,221              1555
     Inland Empire (InlEmp)              Claremont, CA                 2000              CLM           18, 19, 20, 21          9                   134              872                523
     Inland Valleys (InlVal)             Modesto, CA                  1998               MOD           7, 8, 9, 14,            8-9               1,052            1,439               315
                                         Sacramento, CA             2010 2012            SMF                                                       773            1,718               470
     Interior West (InterW)              Albuquerque, NM              2005               ABQ           2, 10                   5-6                 677            2,416               250
     Lower Midwest                       Indianapolis, IN              2006              IND           35                      6-7                 510            3,153               392
                                                                                                                                                                                                GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




      (LoMidW)
     Midwest (MidWst)                    Minneapolis, MN               2004              MSP           36, 41, 43              4-6                 355            4,436               622
     North (NMtnPr)                      Fort Collins, CO              2002              FNL           1, 44, 45               1-4                 349            3,332                452
     Northern California Coast           Berkeley, CA                  2003              JBK           15, 16, 17              9-10                 39            1,786               564
      (NoCalC)
     Northeast (NoEast)                  Queens, New                   2005              JFK           34, 37, 38, 39,         2-5                 560            2,819              1041
                                          York city, NY                                                 40, 42
     Pacific Northwest                   Longview, WA                  2001              LOG           4, 5, 6                 8-9                 157            2,468              1059
      (PacfNW)
     South (Piedmt)                      Charlotte, NC                 2004              CLT           29, 30, 31, 32,         6-8                 847            1,891              1426
                                                                                                        33

     Southern California Coast           Santa Monica, CA              1999              SMA           22, 23, 24              10-11               266              710                570
      (SoCalC)
     Southwest Desert                    Glendale, AZ                  2003              GDL           11, 12, 13              9-10              2,128              637                174
      (SWDsrt)
     Temperate Interior West             Boise, ID                     2005              BOI           3                       7                   387            3,325                417
      (TpIntW)
     Tropical (Tropic)                   Honolulu, HA                  2005              HNL           25                      11                2,416                 0             2206
     a
       From Brenzel (1997).
     b
       From http://planthardiness.ars.usda.gov/PHZMWeb/.
     c
       From McPherson (2010), cooling degree days (CDD) and heating degree days (HDD) are the summation of degrees of the average temperature per day above and below 18.5 °C for the year,
     respectively.
                                                                            Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




    “Reference city,” refers to one city selected for intensive study within each
climate zone (McPherson 2010). Data were collected for a second reference
city in the Inland Valleys climate zone, Sacramento, California, because tree
growth data were required for several ongoing studies. Criteria for selecting a
reference city included (1) an updated computerized tree inventory with location
information for each tree (20,000 to 250,000 street/park trees); (2) information
to accurately age a sample of about 900 trees by the city forester; (3) large, old
trees present in the community; and (4) an aerial lift truck available for 1 week to
sample foliage.

Species and Tree Sampling
The trees sampled in each reference city were obtained from the computerized tree
inventory. First, the inventory was cleaned to remove stumps, dead trees (shown
as scheduled for removal), and vacant sites. It was sorted by species to identify the
most abundant species for sampling. About 20 of the most abundant species were
selected for sampling in each city. Appendix 1 lists the number of trees of each
species sampled in each city (available for download as table S2). The sampled
species accounted for 50 to 95 percent of all trees in the municipal tree invento-
ries. To obtain information spanning the life cycle of each of the predominant tree
species, a stratified random sample was drawn. The sample was stratified into nine
diameter at breast height (d.b.h.) classes (0 to 7.6, 7.6 to 15.2, 15.2 to 30.5, 30.5 to
45.7, 45.7 to 61.0, 61.0 to 76.2, 76.2 to 91.4, 91.4 to 106.7, and >106.7 cm). Thirty
to 70 trees of each species were randomly selected to survey, about 5 to 10 trees
in each d.b.h. class. Smaller samples of 30 trees were drawn for small-growing
species such as Prunus spp. and Malus spp. Seventy trees were drawn for species
with individuals represented in all size classes. An equal number of alternative
trees were selected as replacement trees in the event that the originally sampled
trees could not be located.
     Although 30 to 70 trees were randomly selected for sampling each species,
the final samples ranged from 22 to 79 trees. The lower number resulted when
the original and replacement trees could not be located. The higher numbers
occurred when the sample trees were actually in a different size class than
reported in the inventory. These trees were measured in case viable replace-
ments could not be found. In fact, replacements were found and sample numbers
became greater than expected.




                                                                                                                     17
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                          Tree Data Collection
                          Each variable in the UTD, as well as its definition, abbreviation, and potential use,
                          is listed in table 2. Protocols for data collection are in appendix 2. Metrics recorded
                          for each tree sampled included species, address/location, d.b.h. (to nearest 1.0 cm by
                          tape), tree crown, and bole height (to nearest 0.5 m by clinometer or sonar measur-
                          ing device), crown diameter in two directions (parallel and perpendicular to nearest
                          street to nearest 0.5 m by sonar measuring device) (table 2). Observational informa-
                          tion was recorded on crown shape, land use, distance and direction from nearest
                          air-conditioned/heated building, car shade, and conflicts with utility lines. Other
                          data are presently being analyzed and will be added to the UTD upon publication
                          including sidewalk damage, site type, the amount of planting space, condition of
                          wood and foliage, whether the tree is city or privately managed, maintenance needs,
                          and photograph numbers for the one or two photographs that were taken of each tree
                          and processed in the laboratory to calculate leaf area and crown volume. This pho-
                          tographic method is described in Peper and McPherson (2003) and was found more
                          accurate than other techniques (±25 percent of actual leaf area) for open-grown
                          trees. The tree growth equations and raw data collected for each tree are available
                          for download in the online supplement http://dx.doi.org/10.2737/RDS-2016-0005.
                               Tree age was determined from local residents, the city’s urban forester, street
                          and home construction dates, historical planting records, and aerial and historical
                          photos. In two cases, extra effort was required to obtain age information. Tree
                          coring was used in Queens, New York City, to estimate planting dates instead of
                          relying solely on historical research. Unlike other cities, where streets are lined
                          with trees of the same age because they were all planted at the time of development,
                          street trees in Queens were of all ages because several episodes of planting had
                          ocurred. Dendrologists at the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory’s Tree Ring Lab-
                          oratory cored 150 randomly sampled trees to establish mean tree age. These trees
                          represented a subsample of the original 910 sample trees. One to two trees in size
                          classes 2 through 9 were cored for each species. Cores were analyzed in the lab and
                          tree age established. Urban foresters provided tree ages for an additional 104 sample
                          trees in d.b.h classes 8 and 9 (91.4 to 106.7 cm and >106.7 cm), based on building
                          records, and 34 trees in d.b.h. classes 1 and 2 based on planting records. These data
                          were pooled with ring-count data to develop regressions based on the mean age
                          for each d.b.h. size class. Thus, the online data for Queens, New York City, shows
                          two sets of data, one for data directly collected from each tree and one for tree ages
                          collected from a combination of coring a subsample of the measured trees and aging
                          information provided by New York City Parks and Recreation. Although more
                          accurate aging of trees is required for that region, equations relationships between
                          d.b.h. and parameters other than age reflect actual measured data.
18
                                                                                Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Table 2—Abbreviations, names, descriptions, and uses for each variable in the Urban Tree Database (UTD)

Abbreviation     Name                     Description                                             Use
DbaseID          UTD ID number            Unique ID number for each tree                          To track tree
Region           Climate region           16 U.S. climate regions, abbreviations are used         To identify geographic
                                           (see table 1)                                           region and climate
City             Reference city/state     City/state names where data were collected              To identify city where data
                                                                                                   were collected, associated
                                                                                                   management practices,
                                                                                                   climate, etc.
Source           Original file name       .xls file name                                          To identify locations of
                                                                                                   original data sets
TreeID           Inventory ID             Number assigned to each tree in inventory by city       To link to other tree
                  number                                                                           inventory data
Zone             Inventory                Number of the management area or zone that              To identify where data were
                  management or            the tree is located in within a city or nursery if      collected
                  nursery number           young tree data are collected there
Park/street      Inventory data for       Data listed as park or street or nursery (for young     To identify where data were
                  park, street, or         tree measurements)                                      collected
                  nursery trees
SpCode           Species code             Four- to six-letter code consisting of the first two    To have a stable
                                           letters of the genus name and the first two letters     abbreviation for each
                                           of the species name followed by two optional            species name
                                           letters to distinguish two species with the same
                                           four-letter code
ScientificName   Scientific name          Botanical name                                          To group by taxon
CommonName       Common name              Common name                                             To group by taxon
Treetype         Tree type                Three-letter code where first two letters refer         To assist with matching
                                           to life form (BD = broadleaf deciduous, BE =            species that were not
                                           broadleaf evergreen, CE = coniferous evergreen,         measured
                                           PE = palm evergreen), and the third letter is
                                           mature height (S = small [<8 m], M = medium [8
                                           to 15 m], (L = large [>15 m])
Address          Address number           From inventory, street number of the building           To relocate the tree
                                           where the tree is located
Street           Street name              From inventory, the name of the street on which         To relocate the tree
                                           the tree is located
Side             Side of building or      From inventory, side of building or lot on which        To relocate the tree
                  lot                      the tree is located: F = front, M = median, S =
                                           side, P = park
Cell             Tree number when         From inventory, the cell number (i.e., 1, 2, 3, …),     To relocate the tree
                  multiple trees are at    where protocol determines the order trees at same
                  the same address         address are numbered (e.g., driving direction or
                                           as street number increases)
OnStreet         Name of the street       From inventory (omitted if not a field in city’s        To relocate the tree
                  the tree is on           inventory), for trees at corner addresses when
                                           tree is on cross street rather than addressed street



                                                                                                                            19
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




Table 2—Abbreviations, names, descriptions, and uses for each variable in the Urban Tree Database (UTD)
(continued)
Abbreviation    Name                   Description                                           Use
FromStreet      Name of cross street   From inventory, the name of the first cross           To relocate the tree
                 where first tree is    street that forms a boundary for trees lining
                 inventoried            unaddressed boulevards. Trees are typically
                                        numbered in order (1, 2, 3 …) on boulevards
                                        that have no development adjacent to them, no
                                        obvious parcel addresses
ToStreet        Name of last cross     From inventory, the name of the last cross            To relocate the tree
                 street                 street that forms a boundary for trees lining
                                        unaddressed boulevards
Age             Tree age               Number of years since planted                         For allometric equations
DBH (cm)        Trunk diameter         D.b.h. (1.37 m) measured to nearest 0.1 cm (tape).    For allometric equations
                 at breast height       For multistemmed trees forking below 1.37 m
                 (d.b.h.)               measured above the butt flare and below the
                                        point where the stem begins forking, as per
                                        protocol
TreeHt (m)      Tree height            From ground level to tree top to nearest 0.5 m        For allometric equations
                                        (omitting erratic leader)
CrnBase (m)     Height to crown        Average distance between ground and lowest            For allometric equations
                 base                   foliage layer to nearest 0.5 m (omitting erratic
                                        branch)
CrnHt (m)       Height of crown        Calculated as TreeHT minus Crnbase to nearest         To calculate crown volume
                 from crown base        0.5 m
                 to top
CdiaPar (m)     Crown diameter         Crown diameter measurement taken to the nearest       For average crown diameter
                 measured parallel      0.5 m parallel to the street (omitting erratic
                 to the street          branch)
CDiaPerp (m)    Crown diameter         Crown diameter measurement taken to the nearest       For average crown diameter
                 measured               0.5 m perpendicular to the street (omitting
                 perpendicular to       erratic branch)
                 the street
AvgCdia (m)     Average crown          The average of crown diameter measured parallel       For allometric equations
                 diameter               and perpendicular to the street
Leaf (m2)       Leaf surface area      Estimated using digital imaging method to             Air pollutant and property
                 (one side)             nearest 0.1 m2                                        value effects
Setback         Tree distance          Distance from tree to nearest airconditioned/         Energy effects
                 from conditioned       heated space (may not be same address as tree
                 building               location): 1 = 0 to 8 m, 2 = 8.1 to 12 m, 3 = 12.1
                                        to 18 m, 4 = >18 m.
TreeOr          Tree orientation       Taken with compass, the coordinate of tree taken      Energy effects
                 (compass bearing)      from imaginary lines extending from walls of
                                        the nearest conditioned space (may not be same
                                        address as tree location)
CarShade        Number of parked       Number of parked automotive vehicles with             Air pollutant effects
                 vehicles in tree       some part under the tree’s drip line. Car must be
                 shade                  present: 0 = no autos, 1 = 1 auto, etc.


20
                                                                                                   Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Table 2—Abbreviations, names, descriptions, and uses for each variable in the Urban Tree Database (UTD)
(continued)
Abbreviation             Name                           Description                                                Use
LandUse                  Land use type where            Predominant land use type where tree is growing:           Energy and property value
                          tree is located                1 = single-family residential, 2 = multifamily             effects
                                                         residential (duplex, apartments, condos), 3
                                                         = industrial/institutional/large commercial
                                                         (schools, government, hospitals), 4 = park/
                                                         vacant/other (agric., unmanaged riparian areas
                                                         of greenbelts), 5 = small commercial (minimart,
                                                         retail boutiques, etc.), 6 = transportation corridor.
Shape                    Crown shape                    Visual estimate of crown shape verified from               For crown volume and
                                                         each side with actual measured dimensions of               energy effects
                                                         crown height and average crown diameter: 1
                                                         = cylinder (maintains same crown diameter in
                                                         top and bottom thirds of tree), 2 = ellipsoid, the
                                                         tree’s center (whether vertical or horizontal) is
                                                         the widest, includes spherical), 3 = paraboloid
                                                         (widest in bottom third of crown), 4 = upside
                                                         down paraboloid (widest in top third of crown).
WireConf                 Tree crown conflict            Utility lines that interfere with or appear above          Pruning owing to conflicts
                          with overhead                  tree: 0 = no lines, 1 = present and no potential           may affect crown
                          wires                          conflict, 2 = present and conflicting, 3 = present         dimensions
                                                         and potential for conflicting.
d.b.h.1 to               Trunk d.b.h.                   D.b.h. (cm) for multistemmed trees; for non-               For d.b.h. calculation
 d.b.h.8                                                 multistemmed trees, d.b.h.1 is same as d.b.h.
Note: “-1” for all fields except leaf area, and “-100” for leaf area indicate no data collected.




     In the Lower Midwest zone, the age of 337 of the 911 sampled trees was identi-
fied across d.b.h. ranges through local resources. This represented enough data to
develop age to d.b.h equations for 12 of the 20 species sampled. For the remaining
eight species, analysis was run testing available measured data with the same
species measured in the other 15 climate regions to find the closest relationships.
Closest relationships were found for Catalpa speciosa and Juglans nigra with same
species in Boise, Idaho; with Magnolia grandiflora, Picea pungens, Pyrus sp., and
Ulmus pumila in Fort Collins, Colorado; with Celtis occidentalis in Minneapois,
Minnesota; and with Pinus strobus in Queens, New York City. However, these
relationships were based on a comparison of minimal data from Indianapolis and
should not be construed to be accurate until additional data are available for analy-
sis from Indianapolis. These data are presented in the online UTD database and
annotated in the “Notes” column as to origin. Age to d.b.h. equations shown here
for these eight species, therefore, should be regarded as first-order approximations
until more definitive data are available. For these reasons, tree age is probably the
least accurate metric in this database.
                                                                                                                                            21
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                          Foliar Sampling and Data Collection
                          For each species, one to three trees—typical of species in age, size, and condition—
                          were selected for foliar sampling. Sampling was done from a bucket truck that
                          required room to maneuver to reach the areas of the crown to be sampled. Foliar
                          samples were taken at different locations within each tree crown to capture differ-
                          ences between sun and shade, as well as juvenile and mature foliage. By sampling
                          leaves of different size and maturity, it was possible to obtain relationships between
                          leaf area and dry weight that were representative of the tree’s foliar biomass over
                          time. One set of 10 random quadrat (a cube 30 by 30 by 30 cm) samples were
                          clipped from each tree—three from the lower one-third of the crown, four from the
                          middle section, and three from the top one-third. Within each crown stratum, at
                          least one sample was from the outer, middle, and inner portions. Leaves and stems
                          were clipped along the outside of the cube, and each sample was stored in a labeled
                          ziplock bag. The bags were stored in an ice chest and shipped by overnight delivery
                          to the cold-storage site in Davis, California.
                               The foliar samples were processed to develop relationships between leaf area
                          and foliar biomass for each tree species. The leaves in each bag were separated from
                          stems and twigs, then weighed (fresh weight) and run through the leaf area meter
                          to obtain the sample’s total surface area (leaf area). The foliage was returned to the
                          paper bag and dried in an oven at 65 °C (149 °F) for 3 days (72 hours minimum).
                          On the fourth day, the bag was removed from the oven and weighed (dry weight).
                          The bag was returned to the oven and dried 24 hours then removed from the oven
                          and weighed. If the bag weighed less than its previous weight, it was returned to the
                          oven and dried. This process was repeated until the weight no longer changed. The
                          fresh weight, dry weight, and leaf area were recorded for the foliar samples in each
                          of the 10 bags per species. Leaf area to dry weight and fresh weight to dry weight
                          relationships were calculated for each species using standard descriptive statistics.
                          Resulting data are shown in appendix 3.




22
                                                                          Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Chapter 3: Development of Tree Growth Equations
Six models were tested for seven parameters at four weights. Predicted parameters
included the following: using tree age to predict diameter at breast height (d.b.h.);
and using d.b.h. to predict tree height, crown height, crown diameter, and leaf
area. In addition, crown diameter was used to predict d.b.h. for use with remote
sensing imagery and age predicted from d.b.h. for use in backcasting. Prior to
analysis, raw data points from each region were plotted to examine potential
outliers. Following methods described by Martin et al. (2012), we eliminated from
our analysis those observations identified on residual plots that were greater than
two units larger than the general spread of observations for that parameter. Models
tested included four polynomial models (linear, quadratic, cubic, and quartic), as
well as log-log and exponential:

    Linear		                               			(1)


    Quadratic		                                  			(2)


    Cubic		                                           		          (3)


    Quartic		                                                     (4)


    Log-log		                                                     (5)


    Exponential		                              			(6)

Where yi is the measurement of tree i, a is the mean intercept, b is the mean slope,
xi is the d.b.h. or age of tree i, is the random error for tree i with j ~N(0,σ2), σ2
is the variance of the random error, and wi is a known weight that takes on one of
the following forms: wi = 1, wi = 1/√xi , wi = 1/xi , wi = 1/x2.
     Analysis was conducted using SAS® 9.2 MIXED procedure (SAS 2008). The
bias-corrected Aikaike’s information criterion (AICc) was used to compare and
rank the models because of smaller sample sizes (Akaike 1974). The models with
the “best” fit as indicated by having the smallest AICc were selected. Additional
steps were needed to obtain comparable AICc values for log-log and exponential
models (eqs. 7 and 8). Otherwise AICc values would not be comparable across all
models. Multiplying by the geometric mean allows the AICc values to be compared
with the models where yi is not transformed (Draper and Smith 1998).


                                                                                                                   23
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                              Log-log		                                                     (7)


                              Exponential		                                 		 (8)

                          Where is the geometric mean of the yi values.
                              All weightings for polynomials are built into the coefficients (unlike the expo-
                          nential and log-log formulas). The equations are translated to Excel format in table
                          3 (available for download as table S4).
                              The resulting best fitting model is listed for each measured species and region
                          in the online supplement, table S6 (an example is shown in app. 4), with the mea-
                          sured parameter, predicted tree component, model weight, equation name, the
                          coefficients to use in each model, the minimum and maximum values to estimate
                          between, mean square error, sample size, adjusted R 2, the raw data range, and the
                          degrees of freedom. The model weights are already accounted for in the equation
                          coefficients. The equation name represents the general form of the equation, the
                          details of which are in table 3. Note that log-log and exponential models require an
                          input for mean-squared error (mse), which is listed in table 7 (app. 4) column “c or
                          mse” (i.e., do not calculate and use sigma2).
                               For palms, there is no discernable relationship between age and d.b.h. In con-
                          trast, age is an adequate predictor of tree height. Therefore, equations were devel-
                          oped to predict palm height from age, and subsequently, to predict other parameters
                          such as biomass from palm height.


                          Table 3—Excel-formatted equations for predicting open-grown tree
                          growth parameters

                          Model name      Equation
                          lin             a + b × (age or dbh)
                          quad            a + b × x + c ×x^2
                          cub             a + b × x + c ×x^2 + d × x^3
                          quart           a + b × x + c ×x^2 + d × x^3 + e × x^4
                          log-logw1       EXP(a + b × LN(LN(age or dbh +1) + (mse/2)))
                          log-logw2       EXP(a + b × LN(LN(age or dbh +1)) + (SQRT(age or dbh) + (mse/2)))
                          log-logw3       EXP(a + b × LN(LN(age or dbh +1)) + (age or dbh) + (mse/2))
                          log-logw4       EXP(a + b × LN(LN(age or dbh +1)) + (age^2 or dbh^2) + (mse/2))
                          expow1          EXP(a+ b × (age or dbh) + (mse/2))
                          expow2          EXP(a + b × (age or dbh) + SQRT(age or dbh) + (mse/2))
                          expow3          EXP(a + b × (age or dbh) + (age or dbh) + (mse/2))
                          expow4          EXP(a + b × (age or dbh) + (age^2 or dbh^2) + (mse/2))

24
                                                                            Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




     An important constraint to consider when applying the growth equations to
measured tree data is that equations predicting d.b.h. from age may produce nega-
tive values for young ages. Negative values in d.b.h. estimates may cause continued
problems for predicting tree height and other variables from d.b.h. These values
should take on the first instance of a positive value.
     In the Urban Tree Database (UTD), two sets of data ranges are reported. One
shows the actual range of the data collected and is labelled “Data min” and “Data
max.” To reduce the risk of overextending the application of the equations, we
report application ranges for the equations used to predict each parameter. The
“Apps min” and “Apps max” range informs users on a reasonable range for use of
the equations—sometimes extending beyond collected data points, and sometimes
not reaching those points. Values extending beyond the range of collected data were
considered because there was sufficient knowledge of how large trees grow from
measurements taken in local parks and neighborhoods.

Database Description
The core of the UTD consists of two large data tables that can be downloaded in
ASCII format through the online supplement. The first table (app. 3 and available
for download as table S5) shows summarized results from the foliar sampling for
each species and region. The second table displays equations and coefficients for
predicting tree-growth parameters by species and predicted parameter (table S6).
An excerpt from table S6 for two species in one climate zone is shown in appen-
dix 4. A User Guide (app. 5) provides step-by-step instructions and examples for
applying the growth equations to trees of interest using the core data tables. In
addition, appendix 5 demonstrates how to estimate dry weight biomass and carbon
using allometric equations (tables S7 and S8). Table S9 provides an expanded list


Table 4—Percentage of best fitting model types for tree growth parameters by
measured and predicted parameters

Relationship                                cub   expow   lin   log-log   quad   quart
                                                            Percent
Age to diameter at breast height (d.b.h.)   27      0      31      13      28       0
Crown diameter to d.b.h.                    26      1      23      35      15       0
D.b.h. to age                               38      1      22      14      25       0
D.b.h. to crown diameter                    22             16      23      38       0
D.b.h. to crown height                      13      4      26      24      33       0
D.b.h. to leaf area                         15      2       1      72      10       0
D.b.h. to tree height                       16      3      14      30      35       2
      Total                                 22      2      19      31      26       0

                                                                                                                     25
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                          of dry-weight biomass density factors for common urban species. Lastly, a case
                          study demonstrates differences in d.b.h., tree height, and total carbon across the
                          different climate zones, highlighting the importance of developing region-specific
                          growth models.

                          Data Limitations and Future Research Needs
                          Accurately predicting d.b.h and tree height leads to better estimates of total carbon
                          storage and carbon sequestration. This section describes where uncertainty is great-
                          est and additional research is needed to improve estimates.

                          Tails—
                          In the context of estimating tree size, as well as carbon storage and sequestration for
                          applications such as calculating tree benefits, it is important to continue to improve
                          the accuracy of the equations at the extreme ends of the age spectrum. With limited
                          measurements at the extreme ends of the age spectrum, there is the risk of a few
                          extreme points driving the equation form selection. It is particularly important to
                          sample from larger/older trees because small changes in growth equations can cause
                          large absolute differences in carbon estimates. As trees age, the differences typi-
                          cally increase owing to temporal autocorrelation and differences in equation form.
                          Each additional data point obtained at the upper age range is therefore critical for
                          increasing accuracy of growth and volumetric equations.

                          Age—
                          Sampling from large trees does not guarantee the addition of old trees to the data-
                          base. One practical limitation of the age-to-d.b.h.-regression approach (from size
                          curves instead of real growth curves) is that age data are often difficult to acquire.
                          The lack of age information can limit the use of predictions in applications. For
                          example, not all of the large trees randomly selected for coring in New York City
                          were successfully cored. The length of the coring instrument and pockets of decay
                          inside the tree limited the effectiveness of coring and thus makes this research
                          dependent on people recording tree planting dates. Predictions for d.b.h. from the
                          best model for Platanus × acerifolia in New York City estimated an end d.b.h.
                          growth at and end d.b.h. of 61 cm as predicted from age, even though the largest tree
                          measured was 165 cm d.b.h. This occurred because the largest tree was not cored
                          successfully. Until additional data are collected to represent a larger and more robust
                          sample of tree ages and sizes for each species, the level of inference drawn from
                          these model fits should be limited by staying within the Apps min and Apps max
                          ranges listed in the database.



26
                                                                           Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Size—
Selecting a robust sample of trees that captures a range of sizes is important for
smaller-growing species as well. We found that smaller-growing species, particu-
larly Prunus and Lagerstroemia were problematic for model-fitting. Typically,
there were few specimens smaller than 7.6 cm d.b.h. and many in the 15.2 to 30.5
cm d.b.h. range. In addition, because these trees were often pruned by homeown-
ers, crowns rarely followed a more natural form, resulting in a large variety of
forms and heights. This problem of form manipulation was even greater with
Lagerstroemia, which also might be present as either a single- or multistemmed
plant. Lagerstroemia were often pollarded every year, affecting height and crown
measurements as well as slowing d.b.h. growth.
    It was also more difficult to find good model fits for several of the small- and
medium-growing conifers like Pinus brutia, P. edulis, and P. contorta because
there were few representatives in the 0 to 15.2 cm size class or, as in the case of
P. edulis, most representatives were in the 10.2 to 30.5 cm d.b.h. range with few
samples available below or above that.

Palms—
Palms represent another sampling gap. In the UTD (app. 4), palms do not have mse
or adjusted R 2 because the equations were not calculated from measurements, but
from information provided by palm nurseries and experts in the region. This was
done because the majority of palms were transplanted at anywhere from 5 to 40
years of age, and d.b.h. recorded in tree inventories showed no relationship to other
crown dimensions. Also, city foresters had very little information on the ages of
palms at time of planting. Although the UTD contains measurements for more spe-
cies than ever reported, much more information is needed for truly accurate growth
representation within regions of the country.

Volumetric equations—
The results from the case study (app. 5) demonstrate the differences in growth
patterns among climate zones/regions. Besides improving on the growth equation
database, there is work to be done to expand volumetric equations. As described in
the user guide (app. 5), the volumetric equations used to predict tree volume from
measured parameters are not region specific, because differences between regions
have not yet been tested and localized equations have not been developed. Develop-
ing a more extensive database of volumetric equations for open-grown urban tree
species is a high-priority research need.




                                                                                                                    27
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




28
                                                                        Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Chapter 4: Conclusions
Information on urban tree growth underpins models such as i-Tree that calculate
effects of trees on the environment and human well-being. Data about tree growth
are used to create realistic animations that depict landscape change over decades.
Maximum tree size and other growth data are used by urban forest managers,
landscape architects, and planners to select trees most suitable to the amount of
growing space, thereby reducing costly future conflicts between trees and infra-
structure. Growth data may be used to characterize relationships between growth
and influencing factors such as site conditions and stewardship practices. Despite
the importance of tree growth data to the science and practice of urban forestry,
our knowledge is scant. For example, data have been lacking to specify the range
of bole and crown dimensions for an open-grown red oak (Quercus rubra) tree
exhibiting “normal” growth in New York City.
     Over a period of 14 years, the U.S. Forest Service recorded data from a
consistent set of measurements on over 14,000 trees in 17 U.S. cities. This
network of cities represents municipal forests with different climates, forest
structures, and management histories and practices. Key information collected
for each tree species includes bole and crown size, location, and age. From this
Urban Tree Database (UTD), 365 sets of tree-growth equations were developed
for the predominant species. Although the UTD contains measurements for more
species than ever reported, much more information is needed to better model tree
growth within regions of the country. Tree planting dates are seldom recorded
but remain fundamental to establishing relations between age and size. Captur-
ing the range of ages that exist within the population promises to improve the
lower and upper ends of the growth predictions where most of the uncertainty
currently resides. Also, the value of the UTD can be expanded with new infor-
mation on site conditions (e.g., soil type, microclimate, amount of growing space)
and management practices (e.g., pruning dose, irrigation regime). With such
information, analysts can better predict the effects of practices on tree growth
and the services their trees provide.
     The UTD is not a static repository. Already remeasurements have been con-
ducted on originally measured trees in two cities (Claremont and Santa Monica,
California) to update these equations and better understand the long-term demo-
graphics of street tree populations. These new data, as well as contributions from
other researchers, will be incorporated into the UTD. Continued updating will
ensure that the UTD remains a valuable resource for urban and community forestry.




                                                                                                                 29
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                          Acknowledgments
                          This research was supported by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Ser-
                          vice, Pacific Southwest Research Station, and State Private Forestry’s Urban and
                          Community Forestry Program. We are indebted to the many states and cities that
                          provided support and resources that were vital to this research, not to mention the
                          many seasonal data collectors and analysts.

                          English Equivalents
                          When you know:                      Multiply by:       To find:
                          Millimeters (mm)                      0.0394           Inches (in)
                          Centimeters (cm)                      0.394            Inches (in)
                          Meters (m)                            3.281            Feet (ft)
                          Square meter (m )  2
                                                               10.76             Square feet
                          Cubic meters (m3)                    35.315            Cubic feet (ft3)
                          Grams (g)                            35.315            Ounces (oz)
                          Micrograms or microns (µg)            3.527 x 10 8
                                                                                 Ounces (oz)
                          Kilograms (kg)                        2.205            Pounds (lb)
                          Kilograms per square meter            0.205            Pounds per square foot (lb/ft2)
                          (kg/m2)
                          Metric tonne (t)                      1.102            Tons (ton)
                          Degrees Celsius (°C)                °C × 1.8 + 32      Degrees Fahrenheit (°F)




30
                                                                        Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




References
Aguaron, E.; McPherson, E.G. 2012. Comparison of methods for estimating
  carbon dioxide storage by Sacramento’s urban forest. In: Lal, R.; Augustin,
  B., eds. Carbon sequestration in urban ecosystems. Dordrecht, Netherlands:
  Springer: 43–71.

Akaike, H. 1974. A new look at the statistical model identification. IEEE
  Transactions on Automatic Control. 19(6): 716–723.

Anderegg, W.R.L.; Schwalm, C.; Biondi, F.; Camarero, J.J.; Koch, G.; Litvak,
  M.; Ogle, K.; Shaw, J.D.; Shevliakova, E.; Williams, A.P.; Wolf, A.; Ziaco,
  E.; Pacala, S. 2015. Pervasive drought legacies in forest ecosystems and their
  implications for carbon cycle models. Science. 349(6247): 528–532.

Benjamin, M.T.; Winer, A.M. 1998. Estimating the ozone-forming potential of urban
  trees and shrubs. Atmospheric Environment: Urban Atmospheres. 32(1): 53–68.

Brenzel, K. 1997. Sunset national garden book. Menlo Park, CA: Sunset Books,
  Inc. 656 p.

Cabaraban, M.T.I.; Kroll, C.N.; Hirabayashi, S.; Nowak, D.J. 2013. Modeling
  of air pollutant removal by dry deposition to urban trees using a WRF/CMAQ/i-
  Tree Eco coupled system. Environmental Pollution. 176: 123–133.

Chave, J.; Andalo, C.; Brown, S.; Cairns, M.A.; Chambers, J.Q.; Eamus, D.;
  Folster, H.; Fromard, F.; Higuchi, N.; Kira, T.; Lescure, J.P.; Nelson, B.W.;
  Ogawa, H.; Puig, H.; Riera, B.; Yamakura, T. 2005. Tree allometry and
  improved estimation of carbon stocks and balance in tropical forests. Oecologia.
  145: 87–99.

Clark, J.R.; Matheny, N.P.; Cross, G.; Wade, V. 1997. A model of urban forest
  sustainability. Journal of Arboriculture. 23(1): 17–30.

Climate Action Reserve. 2008. Urban forest greenhouse gas reporting protocol.
  Los Angeles, CA: Climate Action Reserve. 38 p.

Draper, N.R.; Smith, H. 1998. Applied regression analysis. New York: John Wiley
  & Sons, Inc. 736 p.

Fleming, L.E. 1988. Growth estimation of street trees in central New Jersey.
  Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University. 143 p. M.S. thesis.

Frangi, J.L.; Lugo, A.E. 1985. Ecosystem dynamics of a subtropical floodplain
  forest. Ecological Monographs. 55: 351–369.


                                                                                                                 31
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                          Frelich, L.E. 1992. Predicting dimensional relationships for Twin Cities shade
                            trees. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota. 33 p. M.S. thesis.

                          Geron, C.; Harley, P.; Guenther, A. 2001. Isoprene emission capacity for US tree
                            species. Atmospheric Environment. 35: 3341–3352.

                          Grabosky, J.; Gilman, E. 2004. Measurement and prediction of tree growth
                            reduction from tree planting space design in established parking lots. Journal of
                            Arboriculture. 30(3): 154–164.

                          Harris, W.F.; Goldstein, R.A.; Henderson, G.S. 1973. Analysis of forest biomass
                            pools, annual primary production and turnover of biomass for a mixed deciduous
                            forest watershed. In: young, H.E., ed. Proceedings IUFRO symposium working
                            party on forest biomass. Orono, ME: University of Maine press: 41–64.

                          Higuchi, T.K.; Lescure, J.P.; Nelson, B.W.; Ogawa, H.; Puig, H.; Riera, B.;
                            Yamakura, T. 2005. Tree allometry and improved estimation of carbon stocks
                            and balance in tropical forests. Oecologia. 145: 87–99.

                          Hirabayashi, S.; Kroll, C.N.; Nowak, D.J. 2012. Development of a distributed air
                            pollutant dry deposition modeling framework. Environmental Pollution. 171: 9–17.

                          Husch, B.; Beers, T.W.; Kershaw, J.A. 2003. Forest mensuration. New York: John
                            Wiley and Sons. 443 p.

                          Jenkins, J.C.; Chojnacky, D.C.; Heath, L.S.; Birdsey, R.A. 2004.
                            Comprehensive database of diameter-based biomass regressions for North
                            American tree species. Gen. Tech. Rep. NE-319. Newtown Square, PA: U.S.
                            Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northeastern Research Station. 45 p.

                          Larsen, F.K.; Kristoffersen, P. 2002. Tilia’s physical dimensions over time.
                            Journal of Arboriculture. 28(5): 209–214.

                          Lefsky, M.; McHale, M. 2008. Volume estimates of trees with complex architecture
                            from terrestrial laser scanning. Journal of Applied Remote Sensing. 2: 1–19.

                          Leith, H. 1963. The role of vegetation in the carbon dioxide content of the
                            atmosphere. Journal of Geophysical Research. 68: 3887–3898.

                          Linsen, L.; Karis, B.J.; McPherson, E.G.; Hamann, B. 2005. Tree growth
                            visualization. The Journal of Visualization and Computer Graphics. 13: 81–88.

                          Lukaszkiewicz, J.; Kosmala, M. 2008. Determining the age of streetside trees
                            with diameter at breast height-based multifactorial model. Arboriculture and
                            Urban Forestry. 34(3): 137–143.


32
                                                                          Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Lukaszkiewicz, J.; Kosmala, M.; Chrapka, M.; Borowski, J. 2005. Determining
  the age of streetside Tilia cordata trees with a dbh-based model. Journal of
  Arboriculture. 31(6): 280.

Maco, S.E.; McPherson, E.G. 2003. A practical approach to assessing structure,
 function, and value of stree tree populations in small communities. Journal of
 Aboriculture. 29(2): 84–97.

Martin, N.A.; Chappelka, A.H.; Loewenstein, E.F.; Keever, G.J.; Somers,
 G. 2012. Predictive open-grown crown width equations for three oak species
 planted in a southern urban locale. Arboriculture and Urban Forestry. 38(2): 58.

McHale, M.; Burke, I.C.; Lefsky, M.; Peper, P.; McPherson, E.G. 2009. Urban
 forest biomass estimates: Is it important to use allometric relationships developed
 specifically for urban trees? Urban Ecosystems. 12(1): 9.

McHale, M.R.E.; McPherson, E.G.; Burke, I.C. 2007. The potential of urban tree
 plantings to be cost effective in carbon credit markets. Urban Forestry & Urban
 Greening. 6: 49–60.

McPherson, E.G. 2001. Sacramento’s parking lot shading ordinance: environmental
 and economic costs of compliance. Landscape and Urban Planning. 57: 105–123.

McPherson, E.G. 2010. Selecting reference cities for i-Tree Streets. Arboriculture
 and Urban Forestry. 36(5): 230–240.

McPherson, E.G.; Peper, P.J. 2012. Urban tree growth modeling. Arboriculture
 and Urban Forestry. 38: 172–180.

McPherson, E.G.; Simpson, J.R. 1999. Carbon dioxide reductions through urban
 forestry: guidelines for professional and volunteer tree planters. Gen. Tech. Rep.
 PSW-GTR-171. Albany, CA: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
 Pacific Southwest Research Station. 237 p.

McPherson, E.G.; Simpson, J.R. 2002. A comparison of municipal forest benefits
 and costs in Modesto and Santa Monica, California, U.S.A. Urban Forestry &
 Urban Greening. 1: 61–74.

McPherson, E.G.; Simpson, J.R.; Peper, P.J.; Maco, S.E.; Xiao, Q. 2005.
 Municipal forest benefits and costs in five U.S. cities. Journal of Forestry.
 103: 411–416.

McPherson, E.G.; Simpson, J.R.; Peper, P.J.; Xiao, Q. 1999. Benefits and costs
 of Modesto’s municipal urban forest. Journal of Aboriculture. 25(5): 235–248.



                                                                                                                   33
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                          McPherson, E.G.; Simpson, J.R.; Peper, P.J.; Xiao, Q. 2011. Trees pay us back
                           [Brochure]. Albany, CA: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific
                           Southwest Research Station. http://www.fs.fed.us/psw/topics/urban_forestry/
                           products/treebrochures.shtml

                          McPherson, E.G.; Simpson, J.R.; Peper, P.J.; Xiao, Q.; Pittenger, D. 2000. Tree
                           guidelines for inland empire communities. Sacramento, CA: Local Government
                           Commission. 116 p.

                          McPherson, E.G.; Xiao, Q.; Purohit, J.; Dietenberger, M.; Boardman, C.R.;
                           Simpson, J.; Peper, P. 2014. ecoSmart landscapes: a versatile saas platform for
                           green infrastructure applications in urban environments. In: Ames, D.P.; Quinn, N.,
                            eds. 7th international congress on environmental modelling and software. San Diego,
                            CA: International Environmental Modelling and Software Society. (iEMSs): 1–8.

                          Nowak, D.J. 1994a. Atmospheric carbon dioxide reduction by Chicago’s urban
                            forest. In: McPherson, E.G.; Nowak, D.J.; Rowntree, R.A., eds. Chicago’s urban
                            forest ecosystem: results of the Chicago urban forest climate project. Gen. Tech.
                            Rep. NE-GTR-186. Radnor, PA: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
                            Northeastern Forest Experiment Station: 83–94.

                          Nowak, D.J. 1994b. Understanding the structure of urban forests. Journal of
                            Forestry. 92(10): 36–41.

                          Nowak, D.J. 1994c. Urban forest structure: the state of Chicago’s urban forest.
                            In: McPherson, E.G.; Nowak, D.J.; Rowntree, R.A., eds. Chicago’s urban forest
                            ecosystem: results of the Chicago urban forest climate project. Gen. Tech. Rep.
                            NE-GTR-186. Radnor, PA: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
                            Northeastern Forest Experiment Station: 3–18.

                          Nowak, D.J. 1996. Estimating leaf area and leaf biomass of open-grown deciduous
                            urban trees. Forest Science. 42(4): 4.

                          Nowak, D.J.; Hirabayashi, S.; Bodine, A.; Greenfield, E. 2014. Tree and forest
                            effects on air quality and human health in the United States. Environmental
                            Pollution. 193: 119–129.

                          O’Brien, P.R.; Joehlin, K.A.; O’Brien, D.J. 1992. Performance standards for
                            municipal tree maintenance. Journal of Arboriculture. 18(6): 307–315.

                          Ortega, J.; Helmig, D.; Daly, R.W.; Tanner, D.N.; Guenther, A.B.; Herrick, J.D.
                            2008. Approches for quantifying reactive and low-volatility biogenic organic
                            compound emissions by vegetation enclosure techniques—part B: applications.
                            Chemosphere. 72: 365–380.

34
                                                                         Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Peper, P.J.; Alzate, C.P.; McNeil, J.W.; Hashemi, J. 2014. Allometric equaltions
  for urban ash trees (Fraxinus spp.) in Oakville, Southern Ontario, Canada. Urban
  Forestry & Urban Greening. 13: 175–183.

Peper, P.J.; McPherson, E.G. 1998. Comparison of five methods for estimating
  leaf area index of open-grown deciduous trees. Journal of Arboriculture. 24(2):
  98–111.

Peper, P.J.; McPherson, E.G. 2003. Evaluation of four methods for estimating leaf
  area of isolated trees. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening. 2: 19–29.

Peper, P.J.; McPherson, E.G.; Mori, S.M. 2001a. Equations for predicting
  diameter, height, crown width and leaf area of San Joaquin Valley street trees.
  Journal of Arboriculture. 27(6): 306–317.

Peper, P.J.; McPherson, E.G.; Mori, S.M. 2001b. Predictive equations for
  dimensions and leaf area of coastal Southern California street trees. Journal of
  Arboriculture. 27(4): 169–180.

Peper, P.J.; McPherson, E.G.; Simpson, J.R.; Gardner, S.L.; Vargas, K.E.;
  Xiao, Q. 2007. New York City, New York municipal forest resource analysis.
  Albany, CA: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest
  Research Station. 65 p.

Peper, P.J.; McPherson, E.G.; Simpson, J.R.; Vargas, K.E.; Xiao, Q. 2009.
  Lower midwest community tree guide: benefits, costs and strategic planting.
  Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-219. Albany, CA: U.S. Department of Agriculture,
  Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research Station. 115 p.

Pillsbury, N.; Reimer, J.L.; Thompson, R. 1998. Tree volume equations
   for fifteen urban species in California. San Luis Obispo, CA: Urban Forest
   Ecosystems Institute, California Polytechnic State University. 45 p.

Pillsbury, N.H.; Kirkley, M.L. 1984. Equations for total, wood, and saw-log
   volume for thirteen California hardwoods. Res. Note PNW-RN-414. Portland,
   OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research
   Station. 52 p.

Randrup, T.B.; McPherson, E.G.; Costello, L.R. 2001. A review of tree root
  conflicts with sidewalks, curbs, and roads. 5: 209–225.

Sanders, J.; Grabosky, J.; Cowie, P. 2013. Establishing maximum size
  expectations for urban trees with regard to designed space. Arboriculture and
  Urban Forestry. 39(2): 68–73.


                                                                                                                  35
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                          SAS 2008. SAS 9.2. Cary, North Carolina.

                          Scott, K.I.; McPherson, E.G.; Simpson, J.R. 1998. Air pollutant uptake by
                            Sacramento’s urban forest. Journal of Arboriculture. 24(4): 224–234.

                          Semenzato, P.; Cattaneo, D.; Dainese, M. 2011. Growth prediction for five tree
                            species in an Italian urban forest. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening. 10(3): 169–176.

                          Stoffberg, G.; Van Rooyen, M.; Van der Linde, M.; Groeneveld, H. 2008.
                            Predicting the growth in tree height and crown size of three street tree species in the
                            City of Tshwane, South Africa. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening. 7(4): 259–264.

                          Stoffberg, G.H.; van Rooyen, M.W.; van der Linde, M.J.; Groeneveld, H.T.
                            2010. Carbon sequestration estimates of indigenous street trees in the City of
                            Tshwane, South Africa. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening. 9(1): 9–14.

                          Ter-Mikaelian, M.T.; Korzuhkhin, M.D. 1997. Biomass equations for sixty-five
                            North American tree species. Forest Ecology and Management. 97: 1–24.

                          Timilsina, N.; Staudhammer, C.L.; Escobedo, F.J.; Lawrence, A. 2014. Tree
                            biomass, wood waste yield, and carbon storage changes in an urban forest.
                            Landscape and Urban Planning. 127: 18–27.

                          Tritton, L.M.; Hornbeck, J.W. 1982. Biomass equations for major tree species
                            of the northeast. Gen. Tech. Rep. NE-69. Broomall, PA: U.S. Department of
                            Agriculture, Forest Service, Northeastern Forest Experiment Station. 46 p.

                          Troxel, B.; Piana, M.; Ashton, M.S.; Murphy-Dunning, C. 2013. Relationships
                            between bole and crown size for young urban trees in the northeastern USA.
                            Urban Forestry & Urban Greening. 12(2): 144–153.

                          U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service [USDA FS]. 2015. Forest
                            Inventory and Analysis national core field guide. Volume 1: Field guide data
                            collection procedures for phase 2 plots, version 7.0. Washington, DC. 431 p.

                          Van, T.K.; Rayachhetry, M.B.; Center, T.D. 2000. Estimating above-ground
                            biomass of Melaleuca quinquenervia in Florida, USA. Journal of Aquatic Plant
                            Management. 38: 62–67.

                          Vargas, K.E.; McPherson, E.G.; Simpson, J.R.; Peper, P.J.; Gardner, S.L.;
                            Xiao, Q. 2007. Interior West community tree guide: benefits, costs and strategic
                            planting. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-205. Albany, CA: U.S. Department of
                            Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research Station. 95 p.




36
                                                                        Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Vieilledent, G.; Vaudry, R.; Andriamanohisoa, F.D.A.; Rakotonarivo, O.S.;
  Randrianasolo, H.Z.; Razafindrabe, H.N.; Rakotoarivony, C.B.; Ebeling,
  J.; Rasamoelina, M. 2012. A universal approach to estimate biomass and
  carbon stock in tropical forests using generic allometric models. Ecological
  Applications. 22(2): 572–583.

Wenger, K.F. 1984. Forestry handbook. New York: John Wiley and Sons. 1335 p.

Whittaker, R.H.; Likens, G.E.; Woodell, G.M.; Pecans, E.V. 1973. Carbon in
 the biota. Proceedings of the 24th Brookhaven symposium in biology. Upton,
 NY: U.S. Atomic Energy Commission. Technical Info. Services. Office of
 Information Services: 281–302.

Xiao, Q.; McPherson, E.G.; Ustin, S.L.; Grismer, M.E. 2000a. A new approach
  to modeling tree rainfall interception. Journal of Geographical Research
  Atmospheres. 105: 29173–29188.

Xiao, Q.; McPherson, E.G.; Ustin, S.L.; Grismer, M.E.; Simpson, J.R.
  2000b. Winter rainfall interception by two mature open grown trees in Davis,
  California. Hydrological Processes. 14: 763–784.

Yoon, T.K.; Park, C.-W.; Lee, S.J.; Ko, S.; Kim, K.N.; Son, Y.; Lee, K.H.;
  Oh, S.; Lee, W.-K.; Son, Y. 2013. Allometric equations for estimating the
  aboveground volume of five common urban street tree species in Daegu, Korea.
  Urban Forestry & Urban Greening. 12(3): 344–349.

Zanne, A.E.; Lopez-Gonzalez, G.; Coomes, D.A.; Ilic, J.; Jansen, S.; Lewis,
  S.L.; Miller, R.B.; Swenson, N.G.; Wiemann, M.C.; Chave, J. 2009.
  Data from: Towards a worldwide wood economics spectrum. Dryad Digital
  Repository. [Updated]. http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.234. (January 20, 2016).

Zeide, B. 1993. Analysis of growth equations. Forest Science. 39(3): 594–616.

Zeng, B. 2003. Aboveground biomass partitioning and leaf development of Chinese
  subtropical trees following pruning. Forest Ecology and Management. 173: 9.

Zimmerman, E. 2011. Pennsylvania Natural Heritage Program. Red maple–elm–
  willow floodplain forest factsheet. [Updated]. http://www.naturalheritage.state.
  pa.us/community.aspx?=16021. (February 25, 2016).




                                                                                                                 37
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




     Appendix 1: Trees Sampled by Species and Region
     Table 5—Numbers of trees sampled by species and region (continued)

     Scientific name                                          Common name             SpCode   Samples
     Central Florida (CenFla):
      Acer rubrum L.                                          red maple               ACRU       56
      Cinnamomum camphora (L.) J. Presi                       camphor tree            CICA       63
      Eriobotrya japonica (Thunb.) Lindl.                     loquat tree             ERJA       31
      Juniperus virginiana L.                                 southern redcedar       JUSI       50
      Koelreuteria elegans (Seem.) A.C. Sm.                   Chinese rain tree       KOELFO     43
      Lagerstroemia indica L.                                 common crapemyrtle      LAIN       35
      Liquidambar styraciflua L.                              sweetgum                LIST       48
      Magnolia grandiflora L.                                 southern magnolia       MAGR       51
      Pinus elliottii Engelm.                                 slash pine              PIEL       37
      Platanus occidentalis L.                                American sycamore       PLOC       44
      Platycladus orientalis (L.) Franco                      Oriental arborvitae     THOR       37
      Prunus caroliniana (Mill.) Aiton                        Carolina laurelcherry   PRCA       39
      Quercus laurifolia Michx.                               laurel oak              QULA2      67
      Quercus shumardii Buckley                               Shumard oak             QUSH       37
      Quercus virginiana Mill.                                live oak                QUVI       65
      Sabal palmetto (Walter) Lodd. ex Schult. & Schult. f.   cabbage palmetto        SAPA       45
      Syagrus romanzoffiana (Cham.) Glassman                  queen palm              SYRO       30
      Triadica sebifera (L.) Small                            tallowtree              TRSE6      40
      Ulmus parvifolia Jacq.                                  Chinese elm             ULPA       37
      Washingtonia robusta H. Wendl.                          Mexican fan palm        WARO       40

     Coastal Plain (GulfCo):
      Acer rubrum L.                                          red maple               ACRU       36
      Butia capitata (Mart.) Becc.                            jelly palm              BUCA       33
      Carya illinoinensis (Wangenh.) K.Koch                   pecan                   CAIL       36
      Celtis laevigata Willd.                                 sugarberry              CELA       37
      Cornus florida L.                                       flowering dogwood       COFL       34
      Gleditsia triacanthos L.                                honeylocust             GLTR       37
      Ilex opaca Aiton                                        American holly          ILOP       37
      Juniperus virginiana L.                                 eastern red cedar       JUVI       43
      Lagerstroemia indica L.                                 common crapemyrtle      LAIN       42
      Liquidambar styraciflua L.                              sweetgum                LIST       50
      Magnolia grandiflora L.                                 southern magnolia       MAGR       40
      Pinus taeda L.                                          loblolly pine           PITA       47
      Platanus occidentalis L.                                American sycamore       PLOC       56
      Pyrus calleryana Decne.                                 Callery pear            PYCA       36
      Quercus laurifolia Michx.                               laurel oak              QULA2      79

38
                                                                            Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Table 5—Numbers of trees sampled by species and region (continued)

Scientific name                                          Common name                     SpCode          Samples
 Quercus nigra L.                                        water oak                       QUNI              68
 Quercus phellos L.                                      willow oak                      QUPH              45
 Quercus virginiana Mill.                                live oak                        QUVI              76
 Sabal palmetto (Walter) Lodd. ex Schult. & Schult. f.   cabbage palmetto                SAPA              40

Inland Empire (InlEmp):
 Brachychiton populneus (Schott & Endl.) R.Br.           kurrajong                       BRPO              37
 Cinnamomum camphora (L.) J. Presl                       camphor tree                    CICA              57
 Eucalyptus sideroxylon A. Cunn. ex Woolls               red ironbark                    EUSI              37
 Fraxinus uhdei (Wenz.) Lingelsh.                        evergreen ash                   FRUH              37
 Fraxinus velutina ‘Modesto’ Torr.                       Modesto ash                     FRVE_G            36
 Ginkgo biloba L.                                        ginkgo                          GIBI              37
 Jacaranda mimosifolia D. Don                            jacaranda                       JAMI              63
 Lagerstroemia indica L.                                 common crapemyrtle              LAIN              61
 Liquidambar styraciflua L.                              sweetgum                        LIST              38
 Liriodendron tulipifera L.                              tulip tree                      LITU              37
 Magnolia grandiflora L.                                 southern magnolia               MAGR              37
 Pinus brutia Ten.                                       Turkish pine; east              PIBR2             37
                                                          Mediterranean pine
 Pinus canariensis C. Sm.                                Canary Island pine              PICA              39
 Pistacia chinensis Bunge                                Chinese pistache                PICH              40
 Platanus racemosa Nutt.                                 California sycamore             PLRA              37
 Platanus × acerifolia (Aiton) Willd.                    London planetree                PLAC              38
 Pyrus calleryana Decne.                                 Callery pear                    PYCA              39
 Quercus agrifolia Née                                   coastal live oak;               QUAG              37
                                                          California live oak
 Quercus ilex L.                                         holly oak                       QUIL2             35
 Schinus molle L.                                        California peppertree           SCMO              37
 Schinus terebinthifolius Raddi                          Brazilian pepper                SCTE              36
 Washingtonia robusta H. Wendl.                          Mexican fan palm                WARO              36

Inland Valleys (InlVal):
 Acer saccharinum L.                                     silver maple                    ACSA1             29
 Betula pendula Roth                                     European white birch            BEPE              29
 Celtis sinensis Pers.                                   Chinese hackberry               CESI4             30
 Cinnamomum camphora (L.) J. Presl                       camphor tree                    CICA              31
 Fraxinus angustifolia ‘Raywood’ Vahl                    Raywood ash                     FRAN_R            31
 Fraxinus excelsior ‘Hessei’ L.                          Hesse ash                       FREX_H            27
 Fraxinus holotricha Koehne                              Moraine ash                     FRHO              29


                                                                                                                     39
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




     Table 5—Numbers of trees sampled by species and region (continued)

     Scientific name                                     Common name               SpCode   Samples
      Fraxinus pennsylvanica Marshall                    Marshall ash              FRPE_M     28
      Fraxinus velutina Torr.                            Modesto ash               FRVE_G     28
      Ginkgo biloba L.                                   ginkgo                    GIBI       32
      Gleditsia triacanthos L.                           honeylocust               GLTR       27
      Koelreuteria paniculata Laxm.                      goldenrain tree           KOPA       29
      Lagerstroemia indica L.                            common crapemyrtle        LAIN       26
      Liquidambar styraciflua L.                         sweetgum                  LIST       30
      Magnolia grandiflora L.                            southern magnolia         MAGR       29
      Pinus thunbergii Parl.                             Japanese black pine       PITH       26
      Pistacia chinensis Bunge                           Chinese pistache          PICH       30
      Platanus × acerifolia (Aiton) Willd.               London planetree          PLAC       27
      Prunus cerasifera Ehrh.                            cherry plum               PRCE       27
      Pyrus calleryana ‘Bradford’ Decne.                 Callery pear ‘Bradford’   PYCA_B     30
      Quercus ilex L.                                    holly oak                 QUIL2      28
      Zelkova serrata (Thunb.) Makino                    Japanese zelkova          ZESE       31

     Interior West (InterW):
      Chilopsis linearis (Cav.) Sweet                    desert willow             CHLI       30
      Elaeagnus angustifolia L.                          Russian olive             ELAN       30
      Fraxinus americana L.                              white ash                 FRAM       28
      Fraxinus angustifolia ‘Raywood’ Vahl               Raywood ash               FRAN2      30
      Fraxinus pennsylvanica Marshall                    green ash                 FRPE       31
      Fraxinus velutina Torr.                            velvet ash                FRVE       69
      Gleditsia triacanthos L.                           honeylocust               GLTR       68
      Koelreuteria paniculata Laxm.                      goldenrain tree           KOPA       28
      Malus sp.                                          apple                     MA2        30
      Pinus edulis Engelm.                               pinyon pine               PIED       29
      Pinus nigra Arnold                                 Austrian pine             PINI       28
      Pinus ponderosa Douglas ex P. Lawson & C. Lawson   ponderosa pine            PIPO       30
      Pinus sylvestris L.                                Scotch pine               PISY       30
      Pistacia chinensis Bunge                           Chinese pistache          PICH       30
      Platanus × acerifolia (Aiton) Willd.               London planetree          PLAC       70
      Populus angustifolia E. James                      narrowleaf cottonwood     POAN       70
      Populus fremontii S. Watson                        Fremont cottonwood        POFR       70
      Prunus cerasifera Ehrh.                            cherry plum               PRCE       30
      Pyrus calleryana Decne.                            Callery pear              PYCA       32
      Ulmus pumila L.                                    Siberian elm              ULPU       70




40
                                                                    Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Table 5—Numbers of trees sampled by species and region (continued)

Scientific name                                   Common name                    SpCode          Samples
Lower Midwest (LoMidW):
 Acer platanoides L.                              Norway maple                   ACPL              34
 Acer rubrum L.                                   red maple                      ACRU              35
 Acer saccharinum L.                              silver maple                   ACSA1             54
 Acer saccharum Marsh.                            sugar maple                    ACSA2             37
 Catalpa speciosa (Warder) Warder ex Engelm.      northern catalpa               CASP              49
 Celtis occidentalis L.                           northern hackberry             CEOC              56
 Cercis canadensis L.                             eastern redbud                 CECA              33
 Fraxinus americana L.                            white ash                      FRAM              55
 Fraxinus pennsylvanica Marshall                  green ash                      FRPE              49
 Gleditsia triacanthos L.                         honeylocust                    GLTR              35
 Juglans nigra L.                                 black walnut                   JUNI              34
 Malus sp.                                        apple                          MA2               36
 Morus sp.                                        mulberry                       MO                48
 Picea pungens Engelm.                            blue spruce                    PIPU              35
 Pinus strobus L.                                 eastern white pine             PIST              39
 Populus deltoides Bartram ex Marsh               eastern cottonwood             PODE              59
 Pyrus calleryana ‘Bradford’ Decne.               Callery pear ‘Bradford’        PYCA_B            39
 Quercus rubra L.                                 northern red oak               QURU              60
 Tilia cordata Mill.                              littleleaf linden              TICO              36
 Ulmus pumila L.                                  Siberian elm                   ULPU              54

Midwest (MidWst):
 Acer negundo L.                                  Boxelder                       ACNE              43
 Acer platanoides L.                              Norway maple                   ACPL              48
 Acer rubrum L.                                   red maple                      ACRU              46
 Acer saccharinum L.                              silver maple                   ACSA1             41
 Acer saccharum Marsh.                            sugar maple                    ACSA2             48
 Celtis occidentalis L.                           northern hackberry             CEOC              49
 Fraxinus americana L.                            white ash                      FRAM              38
 Fraxinus pennsylvanica Marshall                  green ash                      FRPE              46
 Ginkgo biloba L.                                 ginkgo                         GIBI              48
 Gleditsia triacanthos L.                         honeylocust                    GLTR              48
 Malus sp.                                        apple                          MA2               50
 Quercus palustris Münchh.                        pin oak                        QUPA              47
 Quercus rubra L.                                 northern red oak               QURU              45
 Tilia americana L.                               American basswood              TIAM              46
 Tilia cordata Mill.                              littleleaf linden              TICO              38
 Ulmus americana L.                               American elm                   ULAM              42


                                                                                                             41
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




     Table 5—Numbers of trees sampled by species and region (continued)

     Scientific name                                   Common name           SpCode   Samples
      Ulmus pumila L.                                  Siberian elm          ULPU       37

     North (NMtnPr):
      Acer platanoides L.                              Norway maple          ACPL       60
      Acer saccharinum L.                              silver maple          ACSA1      66
      Acer saccharum Marsh.                            sugar maple           ACSA2      22
      Celtis occidentalis L.                           northern hackberry    CEOC       67
      Fraxinus americana L.                            white ash             FRAM       31
      Fraxinus pennsylvanica Marshall                  green ash             FRPE       65
      Gleditsia triacanthos L.                         honeylocust           GLTR       64
      Gymnocladus dioicus (L.) K. Koch                 Kentucky coffeetree   GYDI       31
      Malus sp.                                        apple                 MA2        31
      Picea pungens Engelm.                            blue spruce           PIPU       34
      Pinus nigra Arnold                               Austrian pine         PINI       33
      Pinus ponderosa Douglas ex P. Lawson & C.        ponderosa pine        PIPO       31
       Lawson
      Populus sargentii Dode                           plains cottonwood     POSA       54
      Prunus sp.                                       plum                  PR         25
      Pyrus sp.                                        pear                  PY         29
      Quercus macrocarpa Michx.                        bur oak               QUMA1      34
      Tilia americana L.                               American basswood     TIAM       33
      Tilia cordata Mill.                              littleleaf linden     TICO       34
      Ulmus americana L.                               American elm          ULAM       61
      Ulmus pumila L.                                  Siberian elm          ULPU       62

     Northern California Coast (NoCalC):
      Acacia melanoxylon R. Br.                        black acacia          ACME       35
      Acer palmatum Thunb.                             Japanese maple        ACPA       38
      Cinnamomum camphora (L.) J. Presl                camphor tree          CICA       70
      Eucalyptus globulus Labill.                      blue gum eucalyptus   EUGL       67
      Fraxinus velutina Torr.                          velvet ash            FRVE       33
      Ginkgo biloba L.                                 ginkgo                GIBI       36
      Liquidambar styraciflua L.                       sweetgum              LIST       37
      Liriodendron tulipifera L.                       tulip tree            LITU       34
      Magnolia grandiflora L.                          southern magnolia     MAGR       38
      Pinus radiata D. Don                             Monterey pine         PIRA       35
      Pistacia chinensis Bunge                         Chinese pistache      PICH       37
      Pittosporum undulatum Vent.                      Victorian box         PIUN       31
      Platanus × acerifolia (Aiton) Willd.             London planetree      PLAC       70


42
                                                                       Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Table 5—Numbers of trees sampled by species and region (continued)

Scientific name                                   Common name                       SpCode          Samples
 Prunus cerasifera Ehrh.                          cherry plum                       PRCE              31
 Pyrus calleryana Decne.                          Callery pear                      PYCA              30
 Pyrus kawakamii Hayata                           evergreen pear                    PYKA              35
 Quercus agrifolia Née                            coastal live oak;                 QUAG              66
                                                   California live oak
 Robinia pseudoacacia L.                          black locust                      ROPS              34
 Sequoia sempervirens (Lamb. ex D. Don) Endl.     coast redwood                     SESE              62
 Ulmus americana L.                               American elm                      ULAM              60
 Ulmus parvifolia Jacq.                           Chinese elm                       ULPA              33

Northeast (NoEast):
 Acer platanoides L.                              Norway maple                      ACPL              42
 Acer rubrum L.                                   red maple                         ACRU              46
 Acer saccharinum L.                              silver maple                      ACSA1             53
 Acer saccharum Marsh.                            sugar maple                       ACSA2             31
 Aesculus hippocastanum L.                        horsechestnut                     AEHI              33
 Fraxinus pennsylvanica Marshall                  green ash                         FRPE              44
 Ginkgo biloba L.                                 ginkgo                            GIBI              33
 Gleditsia triacanthos L.                         honeylocust                       GLTR              34
 Liquidambar styraciflua L.                       sweetgum                          LIST              41
 Malus sp.                                        apple                             MA2               32
 Pinus strobus L.                                 eastern white pine                PIST              32
 Platanus × acerifolia (Aiton) Willd.             London planetree                  PLAC              53
 Pyrus calleryana Decne.                          Kwanzan cherry                    PRSE2             34
 Quercus palustris Münchh.                        Callery pear                      PYCA              33
 Quercus phellos L.                               pin oak                           QUPA              54
 Quercus rubra L.                                 willow oak                        QUPH              33
 Tilia cordata Mill.                              northern red oak                  QURU              51
 Tilia tomentosa Moench                           littleleaf linden                 TICO              48
 Ulmus americana L.                               silver linden                     TITO              30
 Zelkova serrata (Thunb.) Makino                  American elm                      ULAM              40
 Acer platanoides L.                              Japanese zelkova                  ZESE              34

Pacific Northwest (PacfNW):
 Acer macrophyllum Pursh                          bigleaf maple                     ACMA              40
 Acer platanoides L.                              Norway maple                      ACPL              74
 Acer rubrum L.                                   red maple                         ACRU              39
 Acer saccharum Marsh.                            sugar maple                       ACSA2             37
 Betula pendula Roth                              European white birch              BEPE              41


                                                                                                                43
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




     Table 5—Numbers of trees sampled by species and region (continued)

     Scientific name                                   Common name                SpCode   Samples
      Calocedrus decurrens (Torr.) Florin              incense cedar              CADE2      38
      Carpinus betulus ‘Fastigiata’ L.                 columnar hornbeam          CABEF      39
      Crataegus × lavallei Hérincq ex Lavallée         Carriere hawthorn          CRLA       74
      Fagus sylvatica L.                               European beech             FASY       38
      Fraxinus latifolia Benth.                        Oregon ash                 FRLA       39
      Liquidambar styraciflua L.                       sweetgum                   LIST       73
      Malus angustifolia (Aiton) Michx.                southern crabapple         PYAN       39
      Morus alba L.                                    white mulberry             MOAL       38
      Pinus contorta var. bolanderi (Parl.) Vasey      Bolander beach pine        PICO5      39
      Populus balsamifera subsp. Trichocarpa L.        black cottonwood           POTR2      36
      Prunus cerasifera Ehrh.                          cherry plum                PRCE       74
      Prunus serrulata Lindl.                          Kwanzan cherry             PRSE2      38
      Pseudotsuga menziesii (Mirb.) Franco             Douglas-fir                PSME       39
      Quercus rubra L.                                 northern red oak           QURU       39
      Tilia americana L.                               American basswood          TIAM       39
      Tilia cordata Mill.                              littleleaf linden          TICO       40
      Ulmus americana L.                               American elm               ULAM       41

     South (Piedmt):
      Acer rubrum L.                                   red maple                  ACRU       44
      Acer saccharinum L.                              silver maple               ACSA1      48
      Acer saccharum Marsh.                            sugar maple                ACSA2      41
      Betula nigra L.                                  river birch                BENI       39
      Cornus florida L.                                flowering dogwood          COFL       34
      Ilex opaca Aiton                                 American holly             ILOP       34
      Juniperus virginiana L.                          eastern red cedar          JUVI       39
      Lagerstroemia sp.                                common crapemyrtle         LA6        40
      Liquidambar styraciflua L.                       sweetgum                   LIST       43
      Magnolia grandiflora L.                          southern magnolia          MAGR       42
      Malus sp.                                        apple                      MA2        29
      Pinus echinata Mill.                             shortleaf pine             PIEC       36
      Pinus taeda L.                                   loblolly pine              PITA       37
      Prunus sp.                                       plum                       PR         36
      Prunus yedoensis Matsum.                         Yoshino flowering cherry   PRYE       39
      Pyrus calleryana Decne.                          Callery pear               PYCA       34
      Quercus alba L.                                  white oak                  QUAL       47
      Quercus nigra L.                                 water oak                  QUNI       45
      Quercus phellos L.                               willow oak                 QUPH       49
      Quercus rubra L.                                 northern red oak           QURU       40


44
                                                                    Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Table 5—Numbers of trees sampled by species and region (continued)

Scientific name                                   Common name                    SpCode          Samples
 Ulmus alata Michx.                               winged elm                     ULAL               32

Inland Valleys (SacVal):
 Cedrus deodara (Roxb. ex D. Don) G. Don          deodar cedar                   CEDE              61
 Celtis occidentalis L.                           northern hackberry             CEOC              37
 Celtis sinensis Pers.                            Chinese hackberry              CESI4             60
 Cinnamomum camphora (L.) J. Presl                camphor tree                   CICA              63
 Fraxinus velutina Torr.                          Modesto ash                    FRVE_G            40
 Ginkgo biloba L.                                 ginkgo                         GIBI              60
 Lagerstroemia indica L.                          common crapemyrtle             LAIN              28
 Liquidambar styraciflua L.                       sweetgum                       LIST              44
 Liriodendron tulipifera L.                       tulip tree                     LITU              64
 Magnolia grandiflora L.                          southern magnolia              MAGR              67
 Pistacia chinensis Bunge                         Chinese pistache               PICH              38
 Platanus × acerifolia (Aiton) Willd.             London planetree               PLAC              54
 Prunus cerasifera Ehrh.                          cherry plum                    PRCE              34
 Pyrus calleryana Decne.                          callery pear                   PYCA              31
 Quercus agrifolia Née                            coastal live oak;              QUAG              65
                                                   California live oak
 Quercus lobata Née                               valley oak                     QULO              53
 Quercus rubra L.                                 northern red oak               QURU              41
 Sequoia sempervirens (Lamb. ex D. Don) Endl.     coast redwood                  SESE              52
 Ulmus parvifolia Jacq.                           Chinese elm                    ULPA              62
 Zelkova serrata (Thunb.) Makino                  Japanese zelkova               ZESE              47

Southern California Coast (SoCalC):
 Callistemon citrinus (Curtis) Skeels             lemon bottlebrush              CACI              31
 Cedrus deodara (Roxb. ex D. Don) G. Don          deodar cedar                   CEDE              28
 Ceratonia siliqua L.                             algarrobo Europeo              CESI3             31
 Cinnamomum camphora (L.) J. Presl                camphor tree                   CICA              29
 Cupaniopsis anacardioides (A. Rich.) Radlk.      carrotwood                     CUAN              30
 Eucalyptus ficifolia F.Muell                     red flowering gum              EUFI81            32
 Ficus thonningii Blume                           figueira benjamin              FIMI              34
 Jacaranda mimosifolia D. Don                     jacaranda                      JAMI              33
 Liquidambar styraciflua L.                       sweetgum                       LIST              33
 Magnolia grandiflora L.                          southern magnolia              MAGR              33
 Melaleuca quinquenervia (Cav.) S.T. Blake        punk tree                      MEQU              31
 Metrosideros excelsa Sol. ex Gaertn.             New Zealand christmas tree     MEEX              32
 Phoenix canariensis Chabaud                      Canary Island date palm        PHCA              32


                                                                                                             45
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




     Table 5—Numbers of trees sampled by species and region (continued)

     Scientific name                                      Common name             SpCode   Samples
      Pinus canariensis C. Sm.                            Canary Island pine      PICA       30
      Pittosporum undulatum Vent.                         Victorian box           PIUN       36
      Podocarpus macrophyllus (Thunb.) Sweet              yew podocarpus          POMA       31
      Prunus caroliniana (Mill.) Aiton                    Carolina laurelcherry   PRCA       32
      Schinus terebinthifolius Raddi                      Brazilian pepper        SCTE       31
      Tristaniopsis conferta L.A.S.Johnson & K.D.Hill     Brisbane box            TRCO       28
      Washingtonia robusta H. Wendl.                      Mexican fan palm        WARO       30

     Southwest Desert (SWDsrt):
      Acacia farnesiana L.                                sweet acacia            ACFA       31
      Acacia salicina Lindl.                              willow acacia           ACSA3      37
      Brachychiton populneus (Schott & Endl.) R.Br.       kurrajong               BRPO       35
      Chilopsis linearis (Cav.) Sweet                     desert willow           CHLI       34
      Eucalyptus microtheca F. Muell.                     coolibah tree           EUMI2      36
      Fraxinus uhdei (Wenz.) Lingelsh.                    evergreen ash           FRUH       32
      Fraxinus velutina Torr.                             velvet ash              FRVE       59
      Morus alba L.                                       white mulberry          MOAL       39
      Olea europaea L.                                    olive                   OLEU       36
      Parkinsonia aculeata L.                             Jerusalem thorn         PAAC       34
      Parkinsonia florida (Benth. ex A. Gray) S. Watson   blue paloverde          CEFL       32
      Phoenix dactylifera L.                              date palm               PHDA4      56
      Pinus eldarica Medw.                                Afghan pine             PIEL2      30
      Pinus halepensis Mill.                              Aleppo pine             PIHA       34
      Pistacia chinensis Bunge                            Chinese pistache        PICH       33
      Prosopis chilensis (Molina) Stuntz                  algarrobo               PRCH       31
      Quercus virginiana Mill.                            live oak                QUVI       36
      Rhus lancea L.f.                                    African sumac           RHLA       32
      Ulmus parvifolia Jacq.                              Chinese elm             ULPA       36
      Washintonia filifera (Linden) Wendl.                California palm         WAFI       71
      Washingtonia robusta H. Wendl.                      Mexican fan palm        WARO       63

     Temperate Interior West (TpIntW):
      Acer platanoides L.                                 Norway maple            ACPL       62
      Acer saccharinum L.                                 silver maple            ACSA1      58
      Acer saccharum Marsh.                               sugar maple             ACSA2      30
      Catalpa speciosa (Warder) Warder ex Engelm.         northern catalpa        CASP       59
      Crataegus sp.                                       hawthorn                CR         33
      Fraxinus americana L.                               white ash               FRAM       32
      Fraxinus pennsylvanica Marshall                     green ash               FRPE       60


46
                                                                                                    Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Table 5—Numbers of trees sampled by species and region (continued)

Scientific name                                                             Common name                               SpCode              Samples
 Gleditsia triacanthos L.                                                   honeylocust                               GLTR                    33
 Juglans nigra L.                                                           black walnut                              JUNI                    57
 Liquidambar styraciflua L.                                                 sweetgum                                  LIST                    33
 Malus sp.                                                                  apple                                     MA2                     30
 Picea pungens Engelm.                                                      blue spruce                               PIPU                    29
 Pinus sylvestris L.                                                        Scotch pine                               PISY                    29
 Platanus × acerifolia (Aiton) Willd.                                       London planetree                          PLAC                    64
 Platanus occidentalis L.                                                   American sycamore                         PLOC                    48
 Pyrus calleryana Decne.                                                    Callery pear                              PYCA                    34
 Quercus rubra L.                                                           northern red oak                          QURU                    56
 Robinia pseudoacacia L.                                                    black locust                              ROPS                    62
 Tilia americana L.                                                         American basswood                         TIAM                    59
 Ulmus pumila L.                                                            Siberian elm                              ULPU                    55

Tropical (Tropic):
 Bauhinia × blakeana Dunn                                                   Hong Kong orchid tree                     BABL                    37
 Calophyllum inophyllum L.                                                  kamani                                    CAIN4                   62
 Cassia × nealiae H. S. Irwin & Barneby                                     rainbow shower tree                       CANE33                  41
 Casuarina equisetifolia L.                                                 Australian pine                           CAEQ                    62
 Citharexylum spinosum L.                                                   fiddlewood                                CISP2                   35
 Cocos nucifera L.                                                          coconut palm                              CONU                    34
 Conocarpus erectus L. var. argenteus Millsp.                               silver buttonwood                         COERA2                  37
 Cordia subcordata Lam.                                                     kou                                       COSU2                   33
 Delonix regia (Bojer) Raf.                                                 royal poinciana                           DERE                    59
 Elaeodendron orientale Jacq.                                               false olive                               ELOR2                   34
 Ficus benjamina L.                                                         Benjamin fig                              FIBE                    60
 Filicium decipiens (Wight & Arn.) Thwaites                                 fern tree                                 FIDE6                   35
 Ilex paraguariensis A. St.-Hil.                                            Paraguay tea                              ILPA2                   36
 Lagerstroemia speciosa (L.) Pers.                                          giant crapemyrtle                         LASP                    37
 Melaleuca quinquenervia (Cav.) S.T. Blake                                  punk tree                                 MEQU                    59
 Samanea saman (Jacq.) Merr.                                                monkeypod                                 PISA2                   62
 Swietenia mahagoni (L.) Jacq.                                              West Indian mahogany                      SWMA                    54
 Tabebuia aurea (Silva Manso) Benth. & Hook. f. ex S.                       silver trumpet tree                       TAAR                    37
 Tabebuia heterophylla (DC.) Britton                                        pink trumpet tree                         TAPA                    36
 Tabebuia ochracea (Cham.) Standl. subsp.                                   golden trumpet tree                       TACH                    36
  neochrysantha (A.H. Gentry) A.H. Gentry
 Veitchia merrillii H.E. Moore                                              Christmas palm                            VEME                   32
      Total                                                                                                                              14,487
SpCode = four- to six-letter code consisting of the first two letters of the genus name and the first two letters of the species name followed by two
optional letters to distinguish two species with the same four-letter code.


                                                                                                                                                        47
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                          Appendix 2: Field Data Collection Protocols
                          The following data will be recorded for each tree (note: highlighted fields 1 through
                          9 will be uploaded from inventory onto your palmtop and are for locating trees. You
                          will collect data for the remaining items:
                          1. TreeID—from inventory, unique number assigned to each tree by city in
                              inventory.
                          2. SpCode—four- to six-letter code consisting of the first two letters of the
                              genus name and the first two letters of the species name followed by two
                              optional letters to distinguish two species with the same four-letter code.
                          3. AddressNum–from inventory, street number of building where tree is located.
                          4. Street–from inventory, the name of the street on which the tree is located–
                              from inventory.
                          5. Side—from inventory, indicates side of building or lot on which the tree is
                              located (see fig. 10):
                              F = front
                              M = median
                              S = side
                              P = park
                          6. Cell—from inventory, the cell number where the tree is located (1, 2, 3,
                              etc). Obtain city inventory protocols to determine what order the trees are
                              numbered in (e.g., sometimes they are assigned in driving direction or,
                              alternatively, as street number increases, depending upon city).
                          7. OnStree—from inventory (omit if not included as a field in city’s inven-
                              tory), for trees at corner addresses when the tree is actually on a cross street
                              rather than the addressed street (see fig. 10).
                          8. FromStreet/ToStreet—from inventory, the names of the cross streets that
                              form boundaries for trees lining unaddressed boulevards. For example, on
                              boulevards that have no development adjacent to them, therefore no obvious
                              parcel addressing, trees are typically numbered in order. By including clos-
                              est cross streets in the inventory, one will not have to begin counting trees
                              from No. 1 in order to locate No. 333, which is 10 blocks up the boulevard
                              from No. 1.




48
                                                                                                              Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




                                                                                                                          Pacific Northwest Research Station
                                                                                             F1
                                                                                                       1420
                                                             1415
                                                                         F1



                                                                                             F1
                                                                                                       1410
                                                             1405        F1


        Maple Street                                                          Birch Street
                                                                                             S2

                                  285                       295                              S1          305
                                                                         S1


                            F1             F2          F1                                          F1              F2
                                        Apple Street

                                   F2                               F2                                        F2
                       F1                              F1                                         F1


                                                                                             S2
                            280                              290                                         300

                                                                                             S1




Figure 10—Treeloc tree 295 Apple S1 is actually the first tree (in driving direction) on Birch Street
side of house.



9. DBHinv—the diameter at breast height (d.b.h.) from the city inventory,
    usually expressed as classes from one to nine, but class system specific
    to city. Sometimes expressed as d.h.h. to nearest inch or centimeter. Data
    are used to help locate the desired size of tree in the field for sampling.
10. Diameter at breast height—measure the d.b.h. (1.37 m) to nearest 0.1 cm (tape).
    Where possible for multistemmed trees forking below 1.37 m, measure above
    the butt flare and below the point where the stem begins forking. When this is
    not possible, measure diameter root collar (DRC) as described below. Saplings
    (d.b.h./DRC 2.54 to 12.5 cm) will be measured at 1.37 m unless falling under
    multistemmed/unusual stem categories requiring DRC measurements (per
    Forest Health Monitoring (FHM) Field Methods Guide).




                                                                                                                                                               49
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                          DIAMETER at ROOT COLLAR–adapted from Forest Health and Monitoring
                          (FHM) Field Methods Guide:
                          For species requiring DRC, measure the diameter at the ground line or at the stem
                          root collar, whichever is higher. For these trees, treat clumps of stems having a
                          unified crown and common rootstock as a single tree; examples include mesquite
                          and juniper. For multistemmed trees, compute and record a cumulative DRC (see
                          below); record individual stem diameters and a stem status (live or dead) on a
                          separate form or menu as required.

                          Measuring DRC: Before measuring DRC, remove the loose material on the ground
                          (e.g., litter) but not mineral soil. Measure just above any swells present, and in a
                          location where the diameter measurements are reflective of the volume above the
                          stems (especially when trees are extremely deformed at the base).
                               Stems must be at least 0.3 m in length and 2.54 cm in diameter at breast height
                          to qualify for measurement; stems that are missing owing to cutting or damage are
                          not included in measurement.
                               Additional instructions for DRC measurements are illustrated in figure 11.

                          Computing and recording DRC: For all tally trees requiring DRC, with at least
                          one stem 2.54 cm in diameter or larger at the root collar, DRC is computed as the
                          square root of the sum of the squared stem diameters. For a single-stemmed DRC
                          tree, the computed DRC is equal to the single diameter measured.
                              Use the following formula to compute DRC:
                              DRC = SQRT [SUM (stem diameter2)]
                              Round the result to the nearest 2.54 cm. For example, a multistemmed wood-
                          land tree with stems of 12.2, 13.2, 3.8, and 22.1 would be calculated as:
                              DRC = SQRT (12.22 + 13.22 + 3.82 + 22.12)
                              = SQRT (825.93)
                              = 28.74
                              = 28.7
                          11. TreeHt—from ground level to treetop to nearest 0.5 m (omit erratic leader
                              as shown in fig. 12 with rangefinder).
                          12. CrnBase—with rangefinder, average distance between ground and lowest
                              foliage layer (omitting erratic branch) to nearest 0.5 m.
                          13. CDiaPar—(crown diameter) crown diameter measurement taken to the
                              nearest 0.5 m parallel to the street. The occasional erratic branch should not
                              be included (see fig. 13).
                          14. CDiaPerp—(crown diameter) crown diameter measurement taken to the
                              nearest 0.5 m perpendicular to the treet. The occasional erratic branch
                              should not be included (see fig. 13).
50
                                                                                    Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




                                                                                                         U.S. Forest Service




       1. Measure at ground line when                       2. Measure above root collar.
          reasonable.




        3. Multistemmed above diameter.                    4. Excessive diameter below stems.
                                                              Measure stems. Compute DRC.




         5. Measure missing stem(s).                       6. Multistemmed at or below ground.
            Compute DRC.                                      Compute DRC.


Figure 11—How to measure Diameter at Root Collar (DRC) in a variety of situation.




                                                                                                                               51
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




        Pacific Southwest Research Station                                                                                                                       Pacific Southwest Research Station




                                        Figure 12—Tree with erratic leader that should   Figure 13—Erratic branch (in box at left) is omitted from crown
                                        not be included in height measurement.           diameter measurement. Distance measured is represented by white line.



                                                            15. Setback—distance from the tree to the nearest air conditioned/heated space
                                                                (be aware that this may not be the same address as the tree location).
                                                                Evaluate as:
                                                                1 = 0 to 8 m
                                                                2 = 8.1 to 12 m
                                                                3 = 12.1 to 18 m
                                                                4 = >18 m
                                                                Use: assess effects of shade on energy use.
                                                            16. TreeOr—Tree orientation—taken with compass, as in figure 14 the coordi-
                                                                nate of tree taken from imaginary lines extending from walls of the near-
                                                                est conditioned space (heated or airconditioned space—may not be same
                                                                address as tree location):
                                                            17. CarShade—Number of autos where any portion of any parked automotive
                                                                vehicle is under the tree’s drip line. Car must be present:
                                                                0 = no autos
                                                                1 = one auto
                                                                2 = two autos, etc.
                                                                Use: vehicle hydrocarbon emissions reduction.

52
                                                                                     Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




                                     South facing
                                                                             Garage without
                                     air conditioned
                                                                             air conditioning or heat
                                     house


                                                                                 Tree is southeast
                                                                                 of air conditioned
                                                                                 portion of house



     Tree is northeast of air
     conditioned portion of house

          Trees are east of air                                                                Tree is north of
          conditioned portion                                                                  air conditioned
          of house                                                                             portion of house

                  Southeast facing
                  air conditioned
                  house
          Tree is south                                                                               Northwest
          of air conditioned                                                                          facing air
          portion of house                                                                            conditioned
                                                                                                      house

                                                            Tree is west
                                                            of air conditioned     Garage without
                                                            portion of house       air conditioning or heat



Figure 14—Shows imaginary lines extending from walls and associated tree orientation



18. Land use—Area where tree is growing:
    1 = single-family residential
    2 = multifamily residential (duplex, apartments, condos)
    3 = industrial/institutional/large commercial (schools, government, hospitals)
    4 = park/vacant/other (agricultural, unmanaged riparian areas of greenbelts)
    5 = small commercial (minimart, retail boutiques, etc.)
    6 = transportation corridor.
    Use: energy, property value.




                                                                                                                              53
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                          19. Shape–visual estimate of crown shape verified when different from each
                              side with actual measured dimensions of crown height and average crown
                              diameter. If in doubt, determine shape using average crown diameter and
                              crown height measurements. See figure 15. Use: energy (shadow patterns)
                          20. 1 = cylinder = maintains same crown diameter in top and bottom thirds of tree
                          21. 2 = ellipsoid (horizontal or vertical; also includes spherical)—for ellipse the
                              tree’s center (whether vertical or horizontal) should be the widest)
                          22. 3 = paraboloid—widest in bottom third of crown
                          23. 4 = upside down paraboloid—widest in top third of crown
                          24. WireConf—utility lines that interfere with or appear above tree
                              0 = no lines
                              1 = present and no potential conflict
                              2 = present and conflicting
                              3 = present and potential for conflicting
                          25. Image1—select position for best possible photo of tree crown, keeping in
                              mind that you must try to obtain two perpendicular views of the tree that
                              are as free of background noise as possible. Try to position yourself so the
                              tree crown is as isolated as possible from neighboring tree crowns and other
                              crowns in background:
                          26. Distance from tree that photo is taken at increments of 5 m (5, 10, 15, 20 m,
                              etc) and accurate within 0.05 m.
                          27. Camera zoom should be set to full wide angle
                          28. First image must include entire tree (bole and crown) for backup measure-
                              ments and should fill as much of viewfinder as possible
                          29. Kneel to take images so more sky is included in background
                          30. Dist1—Measure distance from camera back (the point where image is actu-
                              ally recorded) to point equivalent to center of tree bole (fig. 16). Measure
                              accurately within 0.05 m.
                          31. Image2—taken as perpendicularly (90°) as possible to Image 1.
                          32. Dist2—distance as per Dist1 for Image 2.
                          33. PlantDate—Date tree was planted. As you collect data, talk with residents
                              and see if you can find name and address of the oldest person on street or in
                              neighborhood, or if residents know age of tree. We will review methods for
                              aging trees during training.
                          34. Notes: any pertinent notes—if tree is replacement and what tree was
                              replaced—give address of replacement tree.
                          35. dbh1, dbh2, dbh3, etc., are for individual stem diameter entries for multi-
                              stemmed trees being recorded using DRC methods. These cells are linked to
                              the formula in field #10 (d.b.h.) column calculating the final d.b.h.
54
                                                                            Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




             1                             2                       2                 4                   5
         Cylindrical                 Horizontal                 Vertical         Paraboloid         Upside down
                                      ellipsoid                 ellipsoid                            paraboloid




Figure 15—Shapes of tree crowns.




      Measuring devise placed
      adjacent to tree center




                             Tree center



             Measuring devise placed
             adjacent to camera back




Figure 16—Showing how to measure distance (in 5-m increments)
between camera back and tree center.




                                                                                                                     55
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                          Appendix 3: Foliar Biomass
                          Table 6 shows the mean and standard deviations for dry-weight to fresh-weight
                          ratios for foliar biomass and the average foliar biomass factors (gram of dry weight
                          per square meter of leaf area) for each species and region. Average foliar biomass
                          factors range from a low of 76.1 g/m2 for climate zone MidWst to a high of 222.7 g/
                          m2 for TpIntW. Across climate zones, there is a range of average foliar biomass fac-
                          tor values by species tree type from a high of 481.9 g/m2 in large conifer evergreen
                          species to a low of 99.3 g/m2 in large broadleaf deciduous species. Within climate
                          zones, there is also high variability, influenced by tree type. For example, although
                          the average foliar biomass factor for NoCalC is 214.4 g/m2, the range is from a high
                          of 659.7 g/m2 (driven by Sequoia sempervirens and Pinus radiata, both factors
                          over 500.0 g/m2) to a low of 73.2 g/m2 Prunus cerasifera. It is important to note
                          the sample number (n) and documented sampling notes when applying these data.
                          Foliar samples were not collected in four of the reference cities (InlVal, InterW,
                          PacfNW, SacVal).


                Table 6—Average dry-weight to fresh-weight (dw:fw) ratios for foliar biomass and average
                foliar biomass factors (gram of dry weight per square meter of leaf area) for each species
                and region (continued)

                Regiona        SpCodeb       Avg dw/fw (g)      dw/fw SD      Avg dw g/m 2   dw g/m 2 SD No.
                CenFla         ACRU              0.46             0.04          102.75         12.28      10
                CenFla         CICA              0.48             0.04           116.42          6.64     10
                CenFla         ERJA              0.41             0.06          162.48         26.87      10
                CenFla         JUSI              0.50             0.03          405.68         48.08      10
                CenFla         KOELFO            0.49             0.04            68.35        12.55      10
                CenFla         LAIN              0.34             0.03            81.38         18.16     10
                CenFla         LIST              0.31             0.02            93.74         15.48     10
                CenFla         MAGR              0.35             0.03          144.87         22.25      10
                CenFla         PIEL              0.44             0.01           107.74         11.50     10
                CenFla         PLOC              0.38             0.04            74.60         13.45     10
                CenFla         THOR              0.42             0.01          207.09          29.85     10
                CenFla         PRCA              0.45             0.05           118.66         19.20     10
                CenFla         QULA2             0.48             0.01           117.81         37.87     10
                CenFla         QUSH              0.50             0.02           110.12         16.49     10
                CenFla         QUVI              0.49             0.04           135.18         51.85     10
                CenFla         SAPA              0.41             0.16          207.21          83.86      7
                CenFla         SYRO              0.46             0.03          132.76          59.85      7
                CenFla         TRSE6             0.36             0.03            73.87         10.81     10
                CenFla         ULPA              0.42             0.04          130.78          37.30     10


56
                                                                        Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Table 6—Average dry-weight to fresh-weight (dw:fw) ratios for foliar biomass and average
foliar biomass factors (gram of dry weight per square meter of leaf area) for each species
and region (continued)

Regiona        SpCodeb      Avg dw/fw (g)      dw/fw SD     Avg dw g/m 2    dw g/m 2 SD No.
CenFla         WARO              0.42            0.07          149.50           18.68        4
GulfCo         ACRU              0.32            0.02           72.68           14.58       10
GulfCo         BUCA              0.71                          331.74                        1
GulfCo         CAIL              0.45            0.03          104.35           16.85       10
GulfCo         CELA              0.33            0.04           58.41           11.16       10
GulfCo         COFL              0.39            0.03           78.34           21.27       10
GulfCo         GLTR              0.40            0.03          159.31          142.22       10
GulfCo         ILOP              0.52            0.02          206.95           13.51       10
GulfCo         JUVI              0.45            0.02          357.56           46.51       10
GulfCo         LAIN              0.30            0.03           78.58           13.71       10
GulfCo         LIST              0.35            0.04           98.90           24.22       10
GulfCo         MAGR              0.43            0.02          221.77           17.98       10
GulfCo         PITA              0.39            0.01          572.86           25.14       10
GulfCo         PLOC              0.40            0.06           71.94           15.67       10
GulfCo         PYCA              0.49            0.02          154.87           22.36       10
GulfCo         QULA2             0.53            0.02          135.55           14.41       10
GulfCo         QUNI              0.53            0.01          147.77           14.32       10
GulfCo         QUPH              0.50            0.03          100.79           10.68       10
GulfCo         QUVI              0.52            0.01          255.19          197.58       10
GulfCo         SAPA              0.63                          303.42                        1
InlEmp         BRPO              0.35                          122.79                       20
InlEmp         CICA              0.46                          176.12                       20
InlEmp         EUSI              0.47                          179.20                       20
InlEmp         FRUH              0.45                          164.23                       20
InlEmp         FRVE              0.53                          144.64                       20
InlEmp         GIBI              0.41                          176.63                       20
InlEmp         JAMI              0.36                          114.76                       20
InlEmp         LAIN              0.46                          256.51                       20
InlEmp         LIST              0.46                          145.46                       20
InlEmp         LITU              0.34                           89.61                       20
InlEmp         MAGR              0.54                          289.27                       20
InlEmp         PIBR2             0.36                          446.89                       20
InlEmp         PICA              0.50                          342.79                       20
InlEmp         PICH              0.45                          118.87                       20
InlEmp         PLAC              0.55                          128.41                       20
InlEmp         PLRA              0.56                          139.39                       20
InlEmp         PYCA              0.59                          186.43                       20
InlEmp         QUAG              0.52                          358.25                       20

                                                                                                                 57
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                Table 6—Average dry-weight to fresh-weight (dw:fw) ratios for foliar biomass and average
                foliar biomass factors (gram of dry weight per square meter of leaf area) for each species
                and region (continued)

                Regiona        SpCodeb      Avg dw/fw (g)      dw/fw SD     Avg dw g/m 2   dw g/m 2 SD No.
                InlEmp         QUIL2             0.60                          202.39                   20
                InlEmp         SCMO              0.31                          166.69                   20
                InlEmp         SCTE              0.43                          153.77                   20
                InlEmp         WARO              0.47            0.05          271.45         52.90      4
                LoMidW         ACPL              0.31            0.12          101.52         53.63     10
                LoMidW         ACRU              0.32            0.05          108.69         16.68     10
                LoMidW         ACSA1             0.29            0.07           85.92         15.37     10
                LoMidW         ACSA2             0.38            0.06          122.58         30.86     10
                LoMidW         CASP              0.25            0.03           72.01         16.29     10
                LoMidW         CEOC              0.31            0.05           72.60         13.00     10
                LoMidW         CECA              0.27            0.04           95.05          9.89     10
                LoMidW         FRAM              0.37            0.02          102.43         16.89     10
                LoMidW         FRPE              0.33            0.04          116.06         22.56     10
                LoMidW         GLTR              0.32            0.07          114.58         29.89     10
                LoMidW         JUNI              0.30            0.03           87.52         10.82     10
                LoMidW         MA2               0.23            0.07          105.13         21.14     10
                LoMidW         MO                0.26            0.04           99.88         22.03     10
                LoMidW         PIPU              0.42            0.04          340.97        169.38     10
                LoMidW         PIST              0.34            0.03          250.60         32.06     10
                LoMidW         PODE              0.28            0.03          122.01         20.47     10
                LoMidW         PYCA              0.30            0.03          115.70         25.59     10
                LoMidW         QURU              0.34            0.05          109.22         21.66     10
                LoMidW         TICO              0.28            0.06          100.13         37.61     10
                LoMidW         ULPU              0.26            0.05          106.42         13.37     10
                MidWst         ACNE              0.30            0.03           52.94         10.21     10
                MidWst         ACPL              0.39            0.03           49.84          7.50     10
                MidWst         ACRU              0.46            0.02           83.29         11.79     10
                MidWst         ACSA1             0.44            0.03           85.83         14.78     10
                MidWst         ACSA2             0.42            0.04           53.62         11.55     10
                MidWst         CEOC              0.40            0.02           68.23          6.79     10
                MidWst         FRAM              0.40            0.03           71.40         15.16     10
                MidWst         FRPE              0.34            0.03           68.62         13.05     10
                MidWst         GIBI              0.31            0.03           91.24         14.10     10
                MidWst         GLTR              0.39            0.02           89.52         12.86     10
                MidWst         MA2               0.40            0.05           67.53         20.50     10
                MidWst         QUPA              0.44            0.02           84.97         10.85     10
                MidWst         QURU              0.45            0.02           85.06         16.44     10


58
                                                                        Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Table 6—Average dry-weight to fresh-weight (dw:fw) ratios for foliar biomass and average
foliar biomass factors (gram of dry weight per square meter of leaf area) for each species
and region (continued)

Regiona        SpCodeb      Avg dw/fw (g)      dw/fw SD     Avg dw g/m 2    dw g/m 2 SD No.
MidWst         TIAM              0.37            0.03           77.04           22.04       10
MidWst         TICO              0.35            0.03           57.33           15.11       10
MidWst         ULAM              0.36            0.02           82.30            9.63       10
MidWst         ULPU              0.41            0.02          124.67           18.41       10
NMtnPr         ACPL              0.40            0.03           68.23           19.36       10
NMtnPr         ACSA1             0.48            0.09           83.03           29.01       10
NMtnPr         ACSA2             0.36            0.06           75.73           11.58       10
NMtnPr         CEOC              0.45            0.04           76.18           16.71       10
NMtnPr         FRAM              0.42            0.06           74.91           11.40       10
NMtnPr         FRPE              0.39            0.08           84.76           20.89       10
NMtnPr         GLTR              0.44            0.03           96.98           21.79       10
NMtnPr         GYDI              0.36            0.03           58.25           13.26       10
NMtnPr         MA2               0.31            0.09           54.94           13.70       10
NMtnPr         PIPU              0.45            0.01          428.00           29.51       10
NMtnPr         PINI              0.43            0.04          411.32           41.37       10
NMtnPr         PIPO              0.44            0.02          399.01           31.95       10
NMtnPr         POSA              0.27            0.04           70.73           12.52       10
NMtnPr         PR                0.41            0.09           71.12           15.74       10
NMtnPr         PY                0.42            0.02          120.06           14.26       10
NMtnPr         QUMA1             0.53            0.11          122.42           14.97       10
NMtnPr         TIAM              0.33            0.03           69.46            8.30       10
NMtnPr         TICO              0.33            0.07           57.75           14.78       10
NMtnPr         ULAM              0.43            0.04           84.33           22.85       10
NMtnPr         ULPU              0.33            0.04           70.29           15.34       10
NoCalC         ACME              0.56            0.05          219.54           23.17       10
NoCalC         ACPA              0.51            0.02           90.67           10.69       10
NoCalC         CICA              0.53            0.05          167.57           18.93        9
NoCalC         EUGL              0.55            0.03          338.48           28.62       10
NoCalC         FRVE              0.60            0.05          184.02           18.19       10
NoCalC         GIBI              0.38            0.02          156.00           60.01       10
NoCalC         LIST              0.48            0.04          125.75           18.38       10
NoCalC         LITU              0.36            0.01           83.00            5.16       10
NoCalC         MAGR              0.48            0.02          232.77           15.65       10
NoCalC         PIRA              0.52            0.03          762.71          127.18       10
NoCalC         PICH              0.51            0.04          143.94           25.88       10
NoCalC         PIUN              0.49            0.01          149.41           11.55       10
NoCalC         PLAC              0.42            0.14          107.74           12.69       10


                                                                                                                 59
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                Table 6—Average dry-weight to fresh-weight (dw:fw) ratios for foliar biomass and average
                foliar biomass factors (gram of dry weight per square meter of leaf area) for each species
                and region (continued)

                Regiona        SpCodeb      Avg dw/fw (g)      dw/fw SD     Avg dw g/m 2   dw g/m 2 SD No.
                NoCalC         PRCE              0.45            0.02           73.19        27.38      10
                NoCalC         PYCA              0.57            0.03          175.06        34.38      10
                NoCalC         PYKA              0.58            0.09          243.93        48.81      10
                NoCalC         QUAG              0.60            0.02          251.98         9.65      10
                NoCalC         ROPS              0.42            0.03           86.20         8.34      10
                NoCalC         SESE              0.52            0.03          556.77        94.40      10
                NoCalC         ULAM              0.79            1.19          160.98       243.30       9
                NoCalC         ULPA              0.46            0.01          192.29        16.69      10
                NoEast         ACPL              0.41            0.04           62.05        18.87      10
                NoEast         ACRU              0.37            0.13           72.68        16.10      10
                NoEast         ACSA1             0.41            0.04           89.82        18.86      10
                NoEast         ACSA2             0.44            0.02           80.77        13.07      10
                NoEast         AEHI              0.43            0.06           85.38        10.89      10
                NoEast         FRPE              0.44            0.02          109.44        12.42      10
                NoEast         GIBI              0.35            0.08          130.59        31.82      10
                NoEast         GLTR              0.44            0.03          124.66        21.56      10
                NoEast         LIST              0.35            0.08           93.78        25.84      10
                NoEast         MA2               0.50            0.05          109.68        23.11      10
                NoEast         PIST              0.38            0.10          717.94       376.53      10
                NoEast         PLAC              0.41            0.01          110.02        20.02      10
                NoEast         PRSE2             0.43            0.03           99.32        19.35      10
                NoEast         PYCA              0.46            0.06          130.15        35.72      10
                NoEast         QUPA              0.45            0.05           88.17        28.31      10
                NoEast         QUPH              0.46            0.03          183.61       278.65      10
                NoEast         QURU              0.46            0.03           96.79        24.42      10
                NoEast         TICO              0.38            0.04          141.78       236.15      10
                NoEast         TITO              0.38            0.01           73.85         8.99      10
                NoEast         ULAM              0.40            0.01           99.77        20.85      10
                NoEast         ZESE              0.45            0.05           73.05        39.55      10
                Piedmt         ACRU              0.44            0.04           86.92        21.30      10
                Piedmt         ACSA1             0.40            0.03           84.77         9.26      10
                Piedmt         ACSA2             0.36            0.12           57.99        30.52      10
                Piedmt         BENI              0.35            0.07           69.63        15.32      10
                Piedmt         COFL              0.35            0.05           54.49        14.71      10
                Piedmt         ILOP              0.34            0.05          124.53        32.68      10
                Piedmt         JUVI              0.40            0.02          559.08        78.10      10
                Piedmt         LA6               0.32            0.03          112.76        18.18      10


60
                                                                        Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Table 6—Average dry-weight to fresh-weight (dw:fw) ratios for foliar biomass and average
foliar biomass factors (gram of dry weight per square meter of leaf area) for each species
and region (continued)

Regiona        SpCodeb      Avg dw/fw (g)      dw/fw SD     Avg dw g/m 2    dw g/m 2 SD No.
Piedmt         LIST              0.33            0.04           80.11           20.74       10
Piedmt         MAGR              0.40            0.04          165.31           26.11       10
Piedmt         MA2               0.28            0.06           57.71           19.52       10
Piedmt         PIEC              0.38            0.02          706.35          201.79       10
Piedmt         PITA              0.39            0.03          525.79           98.03       10
Piedmt         PR                0.29            0.05           57.86           17.15       10
Piedmt         PRYE              0.40            0.05          116.85           28.23       10
Piedmt         PYCA              0.37            0.08          113.74           41.72       10
Piedmt         QUAL              0.42            0.05           73.03           17.37       10
Piedmt         QUNI              0.44            0.08           91.73           20.63       10
Piedmt         QUPH              0.42            0.04           86.21           18.50       10
Piedmt         QURU              0.42            0.06           71.81           16.01       10
Piedmt         ULAL              0.50            0.03           84.65           16.63       10
SoCalC         CACI                                            204.01                       10
SoCalC         CEDE                                            390.93           11.19        3
SoCalC         CESI3                                           233.23           22.20        3
SoCalC         CICA                                            129.86                        1
SoCalC         CUAN                                            178.53           20.01        3
SoCalC         FIMI                                            141.50            7.04        3
SoCalC         JAMI                                            115.85                        1
SoCalC         LIST                                            124.00            4.85        3
SoCalC         MAGR                                            235.45           13.78        3
SoCalC         MEQU                                            201.99                        1
SoCalC         MEEX                                            219.06                        1
SoCalC         PHCA                                            226.15                        1
SoCalC         PIBR2             0.36                          446.89                        1
SoCalC         PICA                                            371.31                        1
SoCalC         PIUN                                            143.46                        1
SoCalC         POMA                                            200.41           13.34        2
SoCalC         SCTE                                            121.99                        1
SoCalC         TRCO                                            174.30                        1
SoCalC         WARO                                            216.16                        1
SWDsrt         ACFA              0.48            0.08          178.75           42.23       10
SWDsrt         ACSA3             0.32            0.02          187.23           16.85       10
SWDsrt         BRPO              0.37            0.02           86.14            6.40       10
SWDsrt         CHLI              0.40            0.02          159.62           25.89       10
SWDsrt         EUMI2             0.48            0.08          145.29           12.16       10


                                                                                                                 61
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                Table 6—Average dry-weight to fresh-weight (dw:fw) ratios for foliar biomass and average
                foliar biomass factors (gram of dry weight per square meter of leaf area) for each species
                and region (continued)

                Regiona        SpCodeb      Avg dw/fw (g)      dw/fw SD     Avg dw g/m 2   dw g/m 2 SD No.
                SWDsrt         FRUH              0.47            0.02          126.35        11.21      10
                SWDsrt         FRVE              0.44            0.02          120.11        13.48      10
                SWDsrt         MOAL              0.49            0.04          153.46        30.14      10
                SWDsrt         OLEU              0.52            0.02          256.39        18.88      10
                SWDsrt         PAAC              0.40            0.06          586.32       126.61      10
                SWDsrt         CEFL              0.51            0.05          181.85        40.64      10
                SWDsrt         PHDA4             0.68            0.02          309.49         5.62       2
                SWDsrt         PIEL2             0.43            0.02          452.68       142.21      10
                SWDsrt         PIHA              0.47            0.02          515.04       199.92      10
                SWDsrt         PICH              0.47            0.06          132.31        27.57      10
                SWDsrt         PRCH              0.45            0.03          177.36        21.06      10
                SWDsrt         QUVI              0.52            0.10          185.64        29.68      10
                SWDsrt         RHLA              0.46            0.04          132.57        15.47      10
                SWDsrt         ULPA              0.53            0.01          203.71        20.19      10
                SWDsrt         WAFI              0.52            0.01          193.01        27.01       2
                SWDsrt         WARO              0.54            0.06          192.46         2.98       2
                TpIntW         ACPL              0.43            0.02           68.37        13.43      10
                TpIntW         ACSA1             0.46            0.12           83.03        11.59       7
                TpIntW         ACSA2             0.43            0.03           59.23        12.41      10
                TpIntW         CASP              0.32            0.05           81.09        35.25      10
                TpIntW         CR                0.48            0.03          113.36        25.49      10
                TpIntW         FRAM              0.41            0.03          101.97        12.78      10
                TpIntW         FRPE              0.39            0.02           78.97        15.26      10
                TpIntW         GLTR              0.45            0.03          113.71        30.52      10
                TpIntW         JUNI              0.41            0.03           97.23        21.33      10
                TpIntW         LIST              0.38            0.03           99.82        17.96      10
                TpIntW         MA2               0.42            0.06           81.29        21.26      10
                TpIntW         PIPU              0.49            0.03          562.63        28.25      10
                TpIntW         PISY              0.46            0.02          477.71        70.45      10
                TpIntW         PLAC              0.40            0.02          101.34        18.50      10
                TpIntW         PLOC              0.38            0.03           91.63        21.75      10
                TpIntW         PYCA              0.42            0.03           93.42        14.80      10
                TpIntW         QUAL              0.47            0.02           91.68        16.86      10
                TpIntW         QURU              0.47            0.06           89.61        13.81      10
                TpIntW         ROPS              0.42            0.11           64.84        14.25      10
                TpIntW         TIAM              0.37            0.03           60.00        13.58      10
                TpIntW         TICO              0.39            0.03           63.38        16.17      10


62
                                                                                                     Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Table 6—Average dry-weight to fresh-weight (dw:fw) ratios for foliar biomass and average
foliar biomass factors (gram of dry weight per square meter of leaf area) for each species
and region (continued)

Regiona               SpCodeb            Avg dw/fw (g)              dw/fw SD          Avg dw g/m 2         dw g/m 2 SD No.
TpIntW                ULPU                      0.40                   0.02               118.79               27.30            10
Tropic                BABL                      0.43                   0.03               121.05               10.66            10
Tropic                CAIN4                     0.41                   0.06               173.82               16.25            10
Tropic                CANE33                    0.45                   0.03                99.05               10.73            10
Tropic                CAEQ                      0.45                   0.17              1466.27              561.35            10
Tropic                CISP2                     0.35                   0.02               109.36               19.44            10
Tropic                CONU                      0.45                   0.06               200.91               28.09             2
Tropic                COERA2                    0.34                   0.02               194.06               87.11            10
Tropic                COSU2                     0.20                   0.02                50.06                9.58            10
Tropic                DERE                      0.38                   0.02               125.06               26.21            10
Tropic                ELOR2                     0.44                   0.01               216.18               14.57            10
Tropic                FIBE                      0.39                   0.02               130.09               22.03            10
Tropic                FIDE6                     0.42                   0.02               151.57               27.80            10
Tropic                ILPA2                     0.42                   0.02               164.33               12.96            10
Tropic                LASP                      0.31                   0.04                99.35               26.17            10
Tropic                MEQU                      0.40                   0.14               189.66               48.45            10
Tropic                PISA2                     0.41                   0.03               118.04               21.74            10
Tropic                SWMA                      0.45                   0.02               110.92               15.42            10
Tropic                TAAR                      0.34                   0.02               155.75               18.22            10
Tropic                TAPA                      0.36                   0.02               136.29               21.70            10
Tropic                TACH                      0.48                   0.03               154.16               31.80            10
Tropic                VEME                      0.41                   0.02               170.11               10.17             2
SD = standard deviation.
a
  CenFla = Central Florida, GulfCo = Coastal Plain, InlEmp = Inland Empire, LoMidW = Lower Midwest, MidWst = Midwest,
NMtnPr = North, NoCalC = Northern California Coast, NoEast = Northeast, Piedmt = South, SoCalC = Southern California
Coast, SWDsrt = Southwest Desert, TpIntW = Temperate Interior West, Tropic = Tropical.
b
  SpCodes = Four- to six-letter code consisting of the first two letters of the genus name and the first two letters of the species
name followed by two optional letters to distinguish two species with the same four-letter code.




                                                                                                                                              63
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                          Appendix 4: Growth Equation Coefficients and
                          Application Information
                          Appendix 4 and the corresponding online supplement report the growth equa-
                          tion coefficients from the best fitting models for each species and region. Table
                          7 illustrates the parameters predicted by the growth equations for two species,
                          ACME and ACPA, in the Northern California Coast climate zone. The full table of
                          coefficients for all species measured in each reference city is available in table S6
                          of the online supplement.
                               Twelve combinations of equation forms and model weights were tested for
                          predicting seven parameters for each species and region. Thirty-one percent of all
                          region-species combinations are best-fit (as measured by AICc values) by log-log
                          (primarily unweighted) equations, followed closely by polynomial quadratic (26
                          percent), cubic (22 percent), and linear (19 percent) equations (app. 4, table 8). How-
                          ever, there is considerable variation in best-fit equation form among measured and
                          predicted parameter types. For example, d.b.h. to leaf area relationship are typically
                          best described by a log-log relationship (72 percent of the best-fit models across
                          species are log-log equations), while d.b.h. to age relationships are most frequently
                          described by cubic equations (38 percent). There is also variation in best-fit model
                          frequency based on tree type, such as evergreen or deciduous, large, medium or
                          small, and broadleaf, conifer, or palm. For example, the relationship between d.b.h.
                          and tree height is most frequently best fit with quadradic models (50 percent) in
                          medium coniferous evergreen species, but small coniferous evergreen species are
                          best fit with linear models (83 percent). Meanwhile, log-log models are the most
                          frequently chosen models for medium broadleaf deciduous species (43 percent).




64
     Table 7—Example of equations for predicting tree-growth parameters by species and predicted parameter in Northern California Coast
     climate zone

                    Ind.                          Model                                                                                               Apps        Apps                                adj
     Species        var.         Pred. a          weightb        EqNamec              A               b           c or mse            d          e     min        max          Sigma        No.       R2     DF
     ACME           dbh        age                 1/dbh           quad           -0.07717         1.03847       -0.00387                             1          74           1.13403       35       0.941   32
     ACME           cdia       dbh               1/cdia^2           quad           0.48486        2.88322         0.17048                             2.78       99.02        1.28772        31      0.927   28
     ACME           dbh        crown dia        1/sqrt(dbh)         quad           0.72517        0.23255        -0.00072                             1.37       16.71        0.31444        31      0.941   28
     ACME           dbh        crown ht         1/sqrt(dbh)      log-logw2         0.33845        1.43614         0.01374                             2.14       13.47        0.1172         31      0.911   29
     ACME           age        dbh                1/age^2            cub           2.85114       -0.12224         0.05596         -0.0005             2.78       99.03        0.11337        35      0.907   31
     ACME           dbh        leaf area             1           log-logw1         0.38175        3.72792         0.30567                             6.38       491.2        0.55287        25      0.895   23
     ACME           dbh        tree ht          1/sqrt(dbh)      log-logw2         0.50713        1.54757         0.00894                             2.6        18.45        0.09454        31      0.948   29
     ACPA           dbh        age                 1/dbh             cub          -2.14827        1.39244         0.00738         -0.00021            0          64           0.70595        38      0.97    34
     ACPA           cdia       dbh               1/cdia^2            lin          -0.767          4.15225                                             2.85       47.38        0.67011        35      0.931   33
     ACPA           dbh        crown dia             1           log-logw1        -1.01932        2.48188         0.03998                             0.78       10.57        0.19994        35      0.928   33
     ACPA           dbh        crown ht            1/dbh             lin           0.90353        0.11475                                             1.23       6.34         0.05462        35      0.771   33
     ACPA           age        dbh                1/age^2            cub           2.84767        0.23083         0.02511         -0.00028            2.85       47.39        0.02437        38      0.944   34
     ACPA           dbh        leaf area             1           log-logw1        -2.21556        5.79413         0.37159                             1.3        368.78       0.60958        33      0.888   31
     ACPA           dbh        tree ht          1/sqrt(dbh)          lin           2.02054        0.15818                                             2.47       9.52         0.36403        35      0.819   33
     ACME, ACPA = Acacia melanoxylon and Acer palmatum, respectively.
     a
       Units of predicted components: age = years, dbh = centimeters, crown dia = meters, crown height = meters, la = m 2.
     b
       Model components: dbh = diameter at breast height, crown dia = crown diameter, crown ht = crown height, tree ht = tree height, la = leaf area, Ind.var. = independent variable; Pred. = predicts
     component; EqName = equation name referring to equations in table 3.
     c
       Log-log and exponential models require an input for mean-squared-error (mse), which is listed in column ”c or mse” (do not calculate and use sigma2).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




65
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




Table 8—Percentage frequency of best-fit equation forms by measured/predicted parameter and tree type

Relationship     BDL    BDM    BDS   BEL    BEM    BES    CEL CEM       CES    PEL    PEM    PES    Total
                                                         Percent
Age to d.b.h.:
 cub             33      26    16      33   25       5     12     67      6                              27
 expow            0       2     0       0    0       0      0      0      0                               0
 lin             24      35    50      33   36      58     36      6     12                              31
 log-log          9      11    18       3    3       0     16     22     82                              13
 quad            34      26    16      30   36      37     36      6      0                              28
 quart            0       0     0       0    0       0      0      0      0                               0
      Total                                                                                             100

Crown diameter to d.b.h.:
 cub              35      25    8      21   33     21      28     22      0                              26
 expow             1       0    5       0    0      0       0      0      0                               1
 lin              11      21   39      24   33     26      36     50     12                              23
 log-log          35      33   34      42   28     37      28     17     82                              35
 quad             19      21   13      12    6     16       8     11      6                              15
 quart             0       0    0       0    0      0       0      0      0                               0
      Total                                                                                             100

D.b.h. to age:
 cub             43      37    32      27   42     32      28      6     94                              38
 expow            1       0     5       0    0      0       4      0      0                               1
 lin             23      19    29      21   17     21      24     28      6                              22
 log-log          7      14    18      12   17     26      12     50      0                              14
 quad            26      30    16      39   25     21      32     17      0                              25
 quart            0       0     0       0    0      0       0      0      0                               0
      Total                                                                                             100

D.b.h. to crown diameter:
 cub               29     21   24      12    3       0     16      0      0     14     93     33         22
 expow              0      0    0       3    0       0      0      0      0      0      0      0          0
 lin                6     25   26       9   25      32     36     28     18      7      0      0         16
 log-log           31     26   24      15   25      47     24     17      0      0      0      0         23
 quad              34     28   26      61   47      21     24     56     82     79      7     53         38
 quart              0      0    0       0    0       0      0      0      0      0      0     13          0
      Total                                                                                             100




66
                                                                                           Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Table 8—Percentage frequency of best-fit equation forms by measured/predicted parameter and tree type
(continued)

Relationship        BDL       BDM       BDS      BEL       BEM       BES     CEL CEM              CES      PEL       PEM       PES      Total
                                                                            Percent
D.b.h. to crown height
 cub               13            9        3        15         6        0         8        22        0        14        73       33          13
 expow               0           2        8         0         8       21         8         0       12         0         0        0           4
 lin                17          25       45        18        36       42        40        22       82         7         0        0          26
 log-log           29           35       29        36        25       26        16         6        6         0         0        0          24
 quad              40           30       16        30        25       11        28        50        0        79        27       53          33
 quart               0           0        0         0         0        0         0         0        0         0         0       13           0
      Total                                                                                                                               100

D.b.h. to leaf area:
 cub                  5          5        5         9         3        0         8       39         0      100         73       93         15
 expow                1          2        0         3         6        5         0        0        12        0          0        0          2
 lin                  1          2        5         3         0        0         0        0         0        0          0        0          1
 log-log             85         75       87        67        81       89        84       44        88        0          0        0         72
 quad                 8         16        3        18        11        5         8       17         0        0         27        7         10
 quart                0          0        0         0         0        0         0        0         0        0          0        0          0
      Total                                                                                                                               100

D.b.h. to tree height:
 cub                 18         12        5        15         6        0        24        17        0         7        93       33         16
 expow                 0         0        8         3         8       21         0         6        0         0         0        0          3
 lin                 10         12       29         9         8        5        16        22       82         0         0        0         14
 log-log             33         33       42        36        36       47        28         6       18         7         0        0         30
 quad                39         42       16        36        42       26        32        50        0        86         7       20         35
 quart                 0         0        0         0         0        0         0         0        0         0         0       47          2
      Total                                                                                                                               100
Tree types: BDL = broadleaf deciduous large, BDM = broadleaf deciduous medium, BDS = broadleaf deciduous small, BEL = broadleaf evergreen
large, BEM = broadleaf evergreen medium, BES = broadleaf evergreen small, CEL = conifer evergreen large, CEM = conifer evergreen medium, CES =
conifer evergreen small, PEL = palm evergreen large, PEM = palm evergreen medium, PES= palm evergreen small.




                                                                                                                                           67
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                          Appendix 5: User Guide
                          This guide provides step-by-step instructions on how to use the allometric equations
                          to estimate tree component dimensions. Predicted parameters included using tree
                          age to predict diameter at breast height (d.b.h.); using d.b.h. to predict tree height,
                          crown height, crown diameter, and leaf area. In addition, crown diameter was used
                          to predict d.b.h., and age from d.b.h. The guide is divided into sections based on the
                          tree components that are to be estimated. In the first section, we show tree diameter,
                          height, crown dimensions, and leaf area from d.b.h. and/or tree height. In the second
                          section, we demonstrate how to estimate dry-weight biomass and carbon using
                          the table of equations presented in appendix 5. Lastly, we present a case study that
                          illustrates the importance of developing region-specific growth models.

                          Calculating Bole Diameter and Height, Crown Dimensions,
                          and Leaf Area

                          Example 1. Calculating d.b.h. and tree height from tree age (d.b.h. and height not
                          measured).
                              In this example, we aim to predict tree dimensions d.b.h., tree height, crown
                          diameter, crown height, and leaf area for a 33-year-old Liquidambar styraciflua
                          (American sweetgum) in the Northern California Coast (NoCalC) region.

                          Step 1. Look up the species and region specific age to d.b.h. equation in table S5 in
                          the online supplement at http://dx.doi.org/10.2737/RDS-2016-0005. The equation
                          name is “quad” for which the equation form is listed in table 3:
                              d.b.h. (Liquidambar styraciflua in NoCalC) = a + b × age + c × age2
                              d.b.h. = 2.80359 + 1.29151 × 33 + 0.00299 × (33)2 = 42.2 cm

                          Step 2. Calculate tree height (ht) from d.b.h. by looking up the equation name and
                          coefficients in table S5 and equation form (cubic) in table 3:
                              ht (Liquidambar styraciflua in NoCalC) = a + b × dbh + c × dbh2 + d × dbh3
                              ht = 0.57478 + 0.62687 × 42.16 + (-0.00837) × (42.2)2 + 0.00004 × (42.2)3 = 15.1 m
                              Having calculated tree d.b.h (and in some cases tree height), it is now possible
                          to skip ahead to section 2 if the goal is to estimate dry-weight biomass and carbon
                          storage/sequestration. To estimate other tree dimensions, continue with steps 3
                          through 6.

                          Step 3. Calculate crown diameter (cdia) from d.b.h. by looking up the equation
                          name and coefficients in table S5 and equation form (cubic) in table 3:
                              cdia (Liquidambar styraciflua in NoCalC) = a + b × dbh + c × dbh2
                              cdia = 0.42238 + 0.29796 × 42.2 +(-0.00131) × 42.22 = 10.7 m

68
                                                                           Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Step 4. Calculate crown height (cht) from d.b.h. by looking up the equation name
and coefficients in table S5 and equation form in table 3:
    cht (Liquidambar styraciflua in NoCalC) = a + b × dbh + c × dbh2 + d × dbh3
    cht = (-0.54095) + 0.53287 × 42.2 + (-0.00872) × 42.22+0.00005 × 42.23 = 10.2 m

Step 5. Calculate leaf area (la) from d.b.h. by looking up the equation name and co-
efficients in table S5 and equation form (log-log) in table 3:
     la = e (a + b × ln (ln (dbh +1) + (mse/2))
     la = e (-1.47634) + 5.49634×LN(LN(42.2+1) + (0.29671/2)) = 413.2 m2
     where e is a mathematical constant equal to 2.71828182845904, the base of the
natural logarithm.

Step 6. To calculate foliar biomass (fb), multiply leaf area (m2) from step 4 by the
average foliar biomass factor (g/m2 leaf area) in appendix 3:
    fb = leaf area × average foliar biomass factor
    fb = 413.2 m2 × 125.75 (g/m2) = 51959.9 g

Estimating Dry-Weight Biomass and Carbon
To estimate the aboveground volume of wood in a tree, measured tree size data are
used with biomass equations. While the growth equations are region-specific, biomass
equations are not. Biomass equations are presented for 26 open-grown urban trees spe-
cies (table 9). Most of these equations are compiled from literature sources described
in the table, while the general equations (Urb Gen Broadleaf and Urb Gen Conifer)
were developed through data collection and analyses. To be consistent with equations
used in the Urban Forest Project Protocols (Climate Action Reserve 2008) for carbon
projects, mass is not included in the formulations. All urban equations predict above-
ground volume in square meters per tree. To convert from volume to dry-weight (DW)
biomass, the predicted volume is multiplied by a DW density factor (table 9).
     In addition to equations developed specifically for urban trees, biomass equa-
tions have been adapted from literature on rural forest biomass and applied for
use in the urban setting (table 10). These equations may produce either volume or
DW biomass directly. Equations predicting DW biomass directly do not need to be
multiplied by a DW density factor.
     Complete listings of equations are available in tables 9 and 10 (downloadable
as tables S6 and S7). All equations are listed in an Excel-ready form so they may be
copied and pasted into an Excel cell. Measurements required for using the biomass
equations are either d.b.h. and tree height, or d.b.h. alone. If data availability
permits, it is recommended that users select the d.b.h. and height equations over the
d.b.h. only equations as they tend to produce more accurate results, particularly for
trees with crowns that have been heavily pruned or topped.
                                                                                                                    69
70
     Table 9—Volume equations for 26 urban tree species requiring diameter at breast height (d.b.h.) (cm) only or d.b.h. (cm) and height (m)
     measurements to calculate volume

     Equation species               SpCode      D.b.h. range                     Equationa                    Predictsb     DW density      Equation sourcec
     D.b.h. and height:                         Centimeters
      Acacia longifolia              ACLO          15 to 57      =0.0000904 × dbhcm^2.18649 × htm^0.46736        V               510               3
      Acer platanoides               ACPL        10 to 102       =0.001011 × dbhcm^1.533 × htm^0.657             V               520               2
      Acer saccharinum               ACSA1        13 to 135      =0.0002383 × dbhcm^1.998 × htm^0.596            V               440               2
      Celtis occidentalis            CEOC         11 to 119      =0.0022451 × dbhcm^2.118 × htm^ to 0.447        V               490               2
      Ceratonia siliqua              CESI3         16 to 74      =0.0001368 × dbhcm^1.79584 × htm^0.92667        V               520               3
      Cinnamomum camphora             CICA        13 to 69       =0.0000807 × dbhcm^2.1348 × htm^0.63404         V               520               3
      Cupressus macrocarpa           CUMA         16 to 147      =0.0000419 × dbhcm^2.2604 × htm^0.6301          V               410               3
                                                                                                                                                               GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




      Eucalyptus globulus            EUGL        116 to 130      =0.0000318 × dbhcm^2.15182 × htm^0.83573        V               620               3
      Fraxinus pennsylvanica         FRPE        15 to 123       =0.0004143 × dbhcm^1.847 × htm^0.646            V               530               2
      Fraxinus velutina ‘Modesto’   FRVE_G         15 to 85      =0.0000385 × dbhcm^1.76296 × htm^1.42782        V               510               3
      Gleditsia triacanthos          GLTR           9 to 98      =0.0004891 × dbhcm^2.132 × htm^0.142            V               600               2
      Gymnocladus dioicus            GYDI          10 to 37      =0.000463 × dbhcm^1.545 × htmet^0.792           V               530               2
      Jacaranda mimosifolia           JAMI         17 to 60      =0.0000801 × dbhcm^2.18578 × htm^0.548045       V               490               3
      Liquidambar styraciflua         LIST         14 to 54      =0.0000631 × dbhcm^2.31582 × htm^0.41571        V               460               3
      Magnolia grandiflora           MAGR          15 to 74      =0.0000504 × dbhcm^2.07041 × htm^0.84563        V               460               3
      Pinus radiata                   PIRA        17 to 105      =0.0000419 × dbhcm^2.226808 × htm^0.668993      V               400               3
      Pistacia chinensis              PICH         13 to 51      =0.0000329 × dbhcm^2.19157 × htm^0.94367        V               685               3
      Platanus × acerifolia          PLAC          16 to 74      =0.0000485 × dbhcm^2.43642 × htm^0.39168        V               500               3
      Populus sargentii              POSA          6 to 137      =0.0019055 × dbhcm^1.806 × htm^0.134            V               370               2
      Quercus ilex                   QUIL2         13 to 52      =0.0000789 × dbhcm^1.82158 × htm^1.06269        V               820               3
      Quercus macrocarpa            QUMA1        11 to 100       =0.0001689 × dbhcm^1.956 × htm^0.842            V               580               2
      Tilia cordata                   TICO         11 to 65      =0.0009453 × dbhcm^1.617 × htm^0.59             V               420               2
      Ulmus americana                ULAM         18 to 114      =0.0012 × dbhcm^1.696 × htm^0.405               V               460               2
      Ulmus parvifolia               ULPA          17 to 56      =0.0000609 × dbhcm^2.32481 × htm^0.49317        V               730               3
      Ulmus pumila                   ULPU         16 to 132      =0.000338 × dbhcm^0.855 × htm^2.041             V               540               2
      Zelkova serrata                 ZESE        15 to 86       =0.0000401 × dbhcm^2.36318 × htm^0.5519         V               520               3
      Urban Gen broadleaf            UGEB          6 to 135      =0.0001967 × dbhcm^1.951853 × htm^0.664255      V        Jenkins, DRYADd          1
      Urban Gen conifer              UGEC         16 to 147      =0.0000426 × dbhcm^2.24358 × htm^0.64956        V        Jenkins, DRYADd          1
     Table 9—Volume equations for 26 urban tree species requiring diameter at breast height (d.b.h.) (cm) only or d.b.h. (cm) and height (m)
     measurements to calculate volume (continued)

     Equation species                           SpCode           D.b.h. range                                 Equationa                        Predictsb     DW density      Equation sourcec
     D.b.h. only:
      Acacia longifolia                         ACLO                 15 to 57            =0.000154 × dbhcm^2.34725                                V               510               3
      Acer platanoides                          ACPL               10 to 102             =0.0019421 × dbhcm^1.785                                 V               520               2
      Acer saccharinum                          ACSA1               13 to 135            =0.000363 × dbhcm^2.292                                  V               440               2
      Celtis occidentalis                       CEOC                11 to 119            =0.0014159 × dbhcm^1.928                                 V               490               2
      Ceratonia siliqua                         CESI3                16 to 74            =0.0002579 × dbhcm^2.128861                              V               520               3
      Cinnamomum camphora                        CICA               13 to 69             =0.0000839 × dbhcm^2.53466                               V               520               3
      Cupressus macrocarpa                      CUMA                16 to 147            =0.0000985 × dbhcm^2.495263                              V               410               3
      Eucalyptus globulus                       EUGL               116 to 130            =0.000161 × dbhcm^2.43697                                V               620               3
      Fraxinus pennsylvanica                    FRPE               15 to 123             =0.0005885 × dbhcm^2.206                                 V               530               2
      Fraxinus velutina ‘Modesto’              FRVE_G                15 to 85            =0.000054 × dbhcm^2.633462                               V               510               3
      Gleditsia triacanthos                     GLTR                  9 to 98            =0.0005055 × dbhcm^2.22                                  V               600               2
      Gymnocladus dioicus                       GYDI                 10 to 37            =0.0004159 × dbhcm^2.059                                 V               530               2
      Jacaranda mimosifolia                      JAMI                17 to 60            =0.0001005 × dbhcm^2.486248                              V               490               3
      Liquidambar styraciflua                    LIST                14 to 54            =0.0000799 × dbhcm^2.560469                              V               460               3
      Magnolia grandiflora                      MAGR                 15 to 74            =0.0000559 × dbhcm^2.622015                              V               460               3
      Pinus radiata                              PIRA               17 to 105            =0.0000469 × dbhcm^2.666079                              V               400               3
      Pistacia chinensis                         PICH                13 to 51            =0.0000392 × dbhcm^2.808625                              V               685               3
      Platanus × acerifolia                     PLAC                 16 to 74            =0.000059 × dbhcm^2.673578                               V               500               3
      Populus sargentii                         POSA                 6 to 137            =0.0020891 × dbhcm^1.873                                 V               370               2
      Quercus ilex                              QUIL2                13 to 52            =0.0000627 × dbhcm^2.607285                              V               820               3
      Quercus macrocarpa                       QUMA1               11 to 100             =0.0002431 × dbhcm^2.415                                 V               580               2
      Tilia cordata                              TICO                11 to 65            =0.0009359 × dbhcm^2.042                                 V               420               2
      Ulmus americana                           ULAM                18 to 114            =0.0018 × dbhcm^1.869                                    V               460               2
      Ulmus parvifolia                          ULPA                 17 to 56            =0.000069 × dbhcm^2.639347                               V               730               3
      Ulmus pumila                              ULPU                16 to 132            =0.0048879 × dbhcm^1.613                                 V               540               2
      Zelkova serrata                            ZESE               15 to 86             =0.0000502 × dbhcm^2.674757                              V               520               3
      Urban Gen broadleaf                       UGEB                 6 to 135            =0.0002835 × dbhcm^2.310647                              V        Jenkins, DRYADd          1
      Urban Gen conifer                         UGEC                16 to 147            =0.0000698 × dbhcm^2.578027                              V        Jenkins, DRYADd          1
     a
       dbhcm = diameter at breast height in centimeters; htm = tree height in meters; dwdensity = dry weight-density factor.
     b
       DWdensity = dry weight biomass in kg/ m3 ; V = aboveground volume in cubic meters per tree.
     c
       Equation source: 1 = Aguaron and McPherson 2012; 2 = Lefsky and McHale 2008; 3 = Pillsbury et al. 1998.
     d
                                                                                                                                                                                                Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




71     Look up the dw density factor in McHale et al. (2009) first, but if not available, then the Global Wood Density Database (Zeng 2003).
72   Table 10—Dry-weight biomass and volume equations derived from rural forests

                                                 D.b.h.                                                                                                                                      Dry-weight Equation
     Equation species                  SpCode range (cm)                                                                  Equationa                                           Predictsb       density    sourcec
     Acer rubrum                        ACRU     0 to 35                              =0.1970 × dbhcm^2.1933                                                                    DW              N/A         6
     Fagus grandifolia                  FAGR    1 to 60                               =0.1957 × dbhcm^2.3916                                                                    DW              N/A         6
     Fraxinus americana                 FRAM     5 to 50                              =0.1063 × dbhcm^2.4798-EXP(-4.0813+5.8816/dbhcm)                                          DW              N/A        6,A
     Juniperus virginiana                JUVI   14 to 43                              =dbhcm+0.1632 × dbhcm^2.2454-(dbhcm+0.1244 × dbhcm^1.5549)                                DW              440        4,B
     Liriodendron tulipifera             LITU    5 to 50                              =0.0365 × (dbhcm)^2.7324-EXP(-4.0813+5.8816/dbhcm)                                        DW              N/A        6,A
     Melaleuca quinquenervia           MEQU    0.5 to 39                              =EXP(-1.83+2.01 × LN(dbhcm))                                                              DW              N/A         7
     Quercus agrifolia                  QUAG   20 to 140                              =0.0000447 × (dbhcm)^2.31958 × (htm)^0.62528                                               V              590         5
     Quercus garryana                  QUGA4   20 to 140                              =0.0000674 × (dbhcm)^2.14321 × (htm)^0.74220                                               V              640         5
     Quercus lobata                     QULO   20 to 140                              =0.0000763 × (dbhcm)^1.94165 × (htm)^0.86562                                               V              550         5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




     Quercus rubra                      QURU     5 to 50                              =0.1130 × (dbhcm)^2.4572-EXP(-4.0813+5.8816/dbhcm)                                        DW              N/A        6,A
     Umbellularia californica          UMCA    20 to 140                              =0.0000763 × (dbhcm)^1.94553) × (htm)^0.88389                                              V              510         5
     Gen Hdwd aspen/alder/cottonwood/ GNHDAA   12 to 50                               =EXP(-2.2094+2.3867 × LN(dbhcm))-EXP(-4.0813+5.8816/dbhcm)                                DW              N/A        4,B
      willow
     Gen Hdwd Harris                   GNHDH       >10                                =EXP(-2.437+2.418 × LN(dbhcm))+EXP(-3.188+2.226 × LN(dbhcm))                               DW              N/A                 3
     Gen Hdwd maple/oak/hickory/beech GNHDHM    14 to 34                              =EXP(-2.0127+2.4342 × LN(dbhcm))-EXP(-4.0813+5.8816/dbhcm)                                 DW              N/A                4,B
     Gen Hdwd soft maple/birch        GNHDSM   12 to 42                               =EXP(-1.9123+2.3651 × LN(dbhcm))-EXP(-4.0813+5.8816/dbhcm)                                 DW              N/A                4,B
     Gen Sftwd cedar/larch            GNSWCL     3 to 61                              =EXP(-2.0336+2.2592 × LN(dbhcm))-EXP(-2.9584+4.4766/dbhcm)                                 DW              N/A                4,B
     General Sftwd doug-fir           GNSWDF   3 to 190                               =EXP(-2.2304+2.4435 × LN(dbhcm))-EXP(-2.9584+4.4766/dbhcm)                                 DW              N/A                4,B
     Gen Sftwd pine                    GNSWP    3 to 99                               =EXP(-2.5356+2.4349 × LN(dbhcm))-EXP(-2.9584+4.4766/dbhcm)                                 DW              N/A                4,B
     Gen Sftwd spruce                  GNSWS     3 to 78                              =EXP(-2.0773+2.3323 × LN(dbhcm))-EXP(-2.9584+4.4766/dbhcm)                                 DW              N/A                4,B
     Gen Sftwd truefir/hemlock        GNSWTF    3 to 111                              =EXP(-2.5384+2.4814 × LN(dbhcm))-EXP(-2.9584+4.4766/dbhcm)                                 DW              N/A                4,B
     Gen Trop Chave                    GNTRC    4 to 148                              =0.112 × ((dw density/1000) × dbhcm^2 × htm)^0.916                                         DW            Jenkins,              1
                                                                                                                                                                                               DRYADd
     Gen Wdlnd juniper/oak/mesquite                  GNWDJO               NA          =EXP(-0.7152+1.7029 × LN(dbhcm))-EXP(-4.0813+5.8816/dbhcm)                                 DW              N/A                4,B
     Genl palms                                        GNP            to 17 m ht      =(6 × htm+0.8)+(0.8 × htm+0.9)                                                             DW              N/A                 2
     Gen spiny dry climate                           GNHDV              2 to 32       =EXP(-1.103+1.994 × LN(dbhcm)+0.317 × LN(htm)+1.303 ×                                      DW            Jenkins,              8
                                                                                       LN(dwdensity/1000))                                                                                     DRYADd
     N/A = not applicable.
     a
       dbhcm = diameter at breast height in centimeters; htm = tree height in meters; dwdensity = dry-weight density factor.
     b
       DW density = dry-weight biomass in kiligrams per cubic meter; V = aboveground volume in cubic meters per tree.
     c
       Equation source: 1 = Chave et al. 2005, 2 = Frangi and Lugo (1985), 3 = Harris et al. (1973), 4 = McHale et al. (2009), 5 = Pillsbury and Kirkley (1984), 6 = Ter-Mikaelian and Korzukhin 1997, 7 = Van et
     al. 2000, 8 = Vieilledent et al. 2012, A = minus Jenkins foliage, B = minus foliage ratio.
     d
       Look up the dry-weight density factor in McHale et al. (2009) first, but if not available, then look it up in the Global Wood Density Database (Zeng 2003).
                                                                             Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




     We developed two general volume equations from the urban species equations,
one for urban broadleaf species and one for conifers. These equations can be used
if the species of interest cannot be matched taxonomically or through wood form
to the species listed in the tables of biomass equations derived from urban or rural
forests (table 10). The general equations predict cubic meters of fresh-wood volume.
Fresh-wood volume is then multiplied by the species’ DW density factor to obtain
aboveground DW biomass. The urban general equations require looking up a dry-
weight density factor (in Jenkins et al. 2004 first, but if not available then the Global
Wood Density Database).
     To estimate total carbon and stored carbon dioxide (CO2) equivalents, dry-
weight biomass (either calculated directly or from fresh-wood volume) is converted
using constants. The DW biomass is multiplied by 1.28 to incorporate belowground
biomass (Husch et al. 2003, Tritton and Hornbeck 1982, Wenger 1984), multiplied
by the constant 0.5 to convert to total carbon stored (Leith 1963, Whittaker et al.
1973), and multiplied by the constant 3.67 (molecular weight of CO2) to convert to
total CO2 stored.
     Dry-weight densities are unique to each tree species and can vary extensively
among species. Volume equations can be applied to other species based on tax-
onomy if a species-specific DW density factor is not known. For example, because
many of the species measured in each of the reference cities were not represented
in tables 9 and 10, it was necessary to assign biomass equations to species for
which there were no available data. Table 11 provides examples of species match-
ing for volume or biomass estimation (see column “Equation Species Code” for
species to which species without information are matched). If the form of the
tree is completely different than any species listed, we recommend using the
general equations for urban broadleaf and conifer trees and look up the species-
specific dry-weight-wood density value in DRYAD, the Global Wood Density
Database (Chave et al. 2005, Frangi and Lugo 1985, Harris et al. 1973, Higuchi
et al. 2005, Jenkins et al. 2004, Pillsbury and Kirkley 1984, Ter-Mikaelian and
Korzuhkhin 1997, Van et al. 2000, Vieilledent et al. 2012, Zanne et al. 2009, Zeng
2003) available as a downloadable Excel spreadsheet at http://datadryad.org/repo/
handle/10255/dryad.235.




                                                                                                                      73
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                Table 11— Expanded list of biomass density factors for common urban species (continued)

                                                                                  Matched        Equation
                SpCode       Scientific name                     DW densitya   equation SpCode    sourceb
                ACFA         Acacia farnesiana                      520             ACLO             8
                ACLO         Acacia longifolia                      520             ACLO             8
                ACMA         Acer macrophyllum                      440             ACPL             6
                ACME         Acacia melanoxylon                     573             ACLO             8
                ACNE         Acer negundo                           420             ACPL             6
                ACPA         Acer palmatum                          450             ACPL             6
                ACPL         Acer platanoides                       520             ACPL             6
                ACRU         Acer rubrum                            490             ACRU             9
                ACSA1        Acer saccharinum                       440            ACSA1             6
                ACSA2        Acer saccharum                         560             ACPL             6
                ACSA3        Acacia salicina                        473             ACLO             8
                AEHI         Aesculus hippocastanum                 500             UGEB             1
                BABL         Bauhinia x blakeana                    527            GNTRC             2
                BENI         Betula nigra                           490             UGEB             1
                BEPE         Betula pendula                         530             UGEB             1
                BRPO         Brachychiton populneus                 387             UGEB             1
                BUCA         Butia capitata                         370            PRACM             3
                CABEF        Carpinus betulus ‘Fastigiata’          598             UGEB             1
                CACI         Callistemon citrinus                   690             UGEB             1
                CADE2        Calocedrus decurrens                   350           GNSWCL           5,B
                CAEQ         Casuarina equisetifolia                728            GNTRC             2
                CAIL         Carya illinoinensis                    600             UGEB             1
                CAIN4        Calophyllum inophyllum                 560            GNTRC             2
                CANE33       Cassia x nealiae                       670            GNTRC             2
                CASP         Catalpa speciosa                       380             UGEB             1
                CECA         Cercis canadensis                      520             UGEB             1
                CEDE         Cedrus deodara                         410           GNSWCL           5,B
                CEFL         Parkinsonia florida                    619            GNHDV            11
                CELA         Celtis laevigata                       490             CEOC             6
                CEOC         Celtis occidentalis                    490             CEOC             6
                CESI3        Ceratonia siliqua                      520             CESI3            8
                CESI4        Celtis sinensis                        490             CEOC             6
                CHLI         Chilopsis linearis                     600            GNHDV            11
                CICA         Cinnamomum camphora                    520             CICA             8
                CISP2        Citharexylum spinosum                  700            GNTRC             2
                COERA2       Conocarpus erectus var. argenteus      690            GNTRC             2
                COFL         Cornus florida                         640             UGEB             1
                CONU         Cocos nucifera                         520            PRACM             3
                COSU2        Cordia subcordata                      640            GNTRC             2

74
                                                                    Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Table 11— Expanded list of biomass density factors for common urban species (continued)

                                                                  Matched         Equation
SpCode       Scientific name                     DW densitya   equation SpCode     sourceb
CR           Crataegus species                      520            UGEB               1
CRLA80       Crataegus laevigata                    620            UGEB               1
CUAN         Cupaniopsis anacardioides              520            UGEB               1
CUMA         Cupressus macrocarpa                   410            CUMA               8
DERE         Delonix regia                          479           GNTRC               2
ELAN         Elaeagnus angustifolia                 520            UGEB               1
ELOR2        Elaeodendron orientale                 676           GNTRC               2
ERJA         Eriobotrya japonica                    520            UGEB               1
EUFI81       Eucalyptus ficifolia                   794            EUGL               8
EUGL         Eucalyptus globulus                    620            EUGL               8
EUMI2        Eucalyptus microtheca                  994            EUGL               8
EUSI         Eucalyptus sideroxylon                 932            EUGL               8
FAGR         Fagus grandifolia                      585            FAGR               9
FASYAT       Fagus sylvatica ‘Atropunicea’          585            FAGR               9
FIBE         Ficus benjamina                        460           GNTRC               2
FIDE6        Filicium decipiens                     805           GNTRC               2
FIMI         Ficus thonningii                       432           GNTRC               2
FRAM         Fraxinus americana                     550            FRAM             9,A
FRAN_R       Fraxinus angustifolia ‘Raywood’        510           FRVE_G              8
FRAN2        Fraxinus angustifolia                  510           FRVE_G              8
FREX_H       Fraxinus excelsior ‘Hessei’            560           FRVE_G              8
FRHO         Fraxinus holotricha                    510           FRVE_G              8
FRLA         Fraxinus latifolia                     500            FRAM             9,A
FRPE         Fraxinus pennsylvanica                 530            FRPE               6
FRPE_M       Fraxinus pennsylvanica ‘Marshall’      530            FRPE               6
FRUH         Fraxinus uhdei                         510            FRPE               6
FRVE         Fraxinus velutina                      510           FRVE_G              8
FRVE_G       Fraxinus velutina ‘Modesto’            510           FRVE_G              8
GIBI         Ginkgo biloba                          520            UGEB               1
GLTR         Gleditsia triacanthos                  600            GLTR               6
GNHDAA       General hardwood jenkins               N/A          GNHDAA             5,B
GNHDH        General hardwood harris                N/A           GNHDH               4
GNHDHM       General hardwood jenkins               N/A          GNHDHM             5,B
GNHDSM       General hardwood jenkins               N/A          GNHDSM             5,B
GNHDV        General spiny dry vieilledent          N/A           GNHDV              11
GNSWCL       General softwood jenkins               N/A          GNSWCL             5,B
GNSWDF       General softwood jenkins               N/A          GNSWDF             5,B
GNSWP        General softwood jenkins               N/A           GNSWP             5,B
GNSWS        General softwood jenkins               N/A           GNSWS             5,B

                                                                                                             75
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                Table 11— Expanded list of biomass density factors for common urban species (continued)

                                                                                     Matched        Equation
                SpCode       Scientific name                        DW densitya   equation SpCode    sourceb
                GNSWTF       General softwood jenkins                  N/A           GNSWTF          5,B
                GNTRC        General tropical chave                    N/A            GNTRC            2
                GNWDJO       General woodland jenkins                  N/A           GNWDJO          5,B
                GYDI         Gymnocladus dioicus                       530             UGEB            1
                ILOP         Ilex opaca                                500             UGEB            1
                ILPA2        Ilex paraguariensis                       565            GNTRC            2
                JAMI         Jacaranda mimosifolia                     490             JAMI            8
                JUNI         Juglans nigra                              510            UGEB            1
                JUSI         Juniperus virginiana var. silicicola      420             JUVI          5,B
                JUVI         Juniperus virginiana                      440             JUVI          5,B
                KOEL         Koelreuteria elegans                      595             UGEB            1
                KOPA         Koelreuteria paniculata                   620             UGEB            1
                LA6          Lagerstroemia species                      571            UGEB            1
                LAIN         Lagerstroemia indica                       571            UGEB            1
                LASP         Lagerstroemia speciosa                     612           GNTRC            2
                LIST         Liquidambar styraciflua                   460             LIST            8
                LITU         Liriodendron tulipifera                   400             LITU          9,A
                MA2          Malus species                              610            UGEB            1
                MAGR         Magnolia grandiflora                      460            MAGR             8
                MEEX         Metrosideros excelsa                      1150            UGEB            1
                MEQU         Melaleuca quinquenervia                   520            MEQU            10
                MO           Morus species                             520             UGEB            1
                MOAL         Morus alba                                520             UGEB            1
                OLEU         Olea europaea                             700             UGEB            1
                PAAC         Parkinsonia aculeata                       610          GNHDV            11
                PHCA         Phoenix canariensis                        370           PRACM            3
                PHDA4        Phoenix dactylifera                        370           PRACM            3
                PIBR2        Pinus brutia                              430             UGEC            1
                PICA         Pinus canariensis                          610            UGEC            1
                PICH         Pistacia chinensis                        685             PICH            8
                PICO5        Pinus contorta var. bolanderi             380             UGEC            1
                PIEC         Pinus echinata                             470            UGEC            1
                PIED         Pinus edulis                              500             UGEC            1
                PIEL2        Pinus eldarica                            540             UGEC            1
                PIHA         Pinus halepensis                          460             UGEC            1
                PINI         Pinus nigra                               430             UGEC            1
                PIPO         Pinus ponderosa                           380             UGEC            1
                PIPU         Picea pungens                             360             UGEC            1
                PIRA         Pinus radiata                             400             PIRA            8

76
                                                                       Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Table 11— Expanded list of biomass density factors for common urban species (continued)

                                                                     Matched         Equation
SpCode       Scientific name                        DW densitya   equation SpCode     sourceb
PISA2        Samanea saman                             520            GNTRC              2
PIST         Pinus strobus                             340             UGEC              1
PISY         Pinus sylvestris                          430             UGEC              1
PITA         Pinus taeda                               470             UGEC              1
PITH         Pinus thunbergiana                        430             UGEC              1
PIUN         Pittosporum undulatum                     745             UGEB              1
PLAC         Platanus × acerifolia                     500             PLAC              8
PLOC         Platanus occidentalis                     480             PLAC              8
PLRA         Platanus racemosa                         480             PLAC              8
POAN         Populus angustifolia                      350             POSA              6
PODE         Populus deltoides                         370             POSA              6
POFR         Populus fremontii                         410             POSA              6
POMA         Podocarpus macrophyllus                   470             UGEB              1
POSA         Populus sargentii                         370             POSA              6
POTR2        Populus balsamifera ssp. trichocarpa      310             POSA              6
PR           Prunus species                            560             UGEB              1
PRACM        Prestoea montana                          370            PRACM              3
PRCA         Prunus caroliniana                        560             UGEB              1
PRCE         Prunus cerasifera                         470             UGEB              1
PRCEKW       Prunus cerasifera ‘Thundercloud’          560             UGEB              1
PRCH         Prosopis chilensis                        740           GNHDV              11
PRSE2        Prunus serrulata                          560             UGEB              1
PRYE         Prunus yedoensis                          470             UGEB              1
PSME         Pseudotsuga menziesii                     450           GNSWDF            5,B
PY           Pyrus species                             600             UGEB              1
PYAN         Malus angustifolia                        610             UGEB              1
PYCA         Pyrus calleryana                          600             UGEB              1
PYCA_B       Pyrus calleryana ‘Bradford’               600             UGEB              1
PYKA         Pyrus kawakamii                           600             UGEB              1
QUAG         Quercus agrifolia                         590             QUAG              7
QUAL         Quercus alba                              600            QUGA4              7
QUGA4        Quercus garryana                          640            QUGA4              7
QUIL2        Quercus ilex                              820             QUIL2             8
QULA2        Quercus laurifolia                        560             QULO              7
QULO         Quercus lobata                            550             QULO              7
QUMA1        Quercus macrocarpa                        580           QUMA1               6
QUNI         Quercus nigra                             560             QUAG              7
QUPA         Quercus palustris                         580             QUAG              7
QUPH         Quercus phellos                           560             QUAG              7

                                                                                                                77
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                Table 11— Expanded list of biomass density factors for common urban species (continued)

                                                                                                            Matched                Equation
                SpCode             Scientific name                                   DW densitya         equation SpCode            sourceb
                QURU               Quercus rubra                                           560                 QURU                   9,A
                QUSH               Quercus shumardii                                       590                 QUAG                     7
                QUVI               Quercus virginiana                                      800                 QUGA4                    7
                RHLA               Rhus lancea                                             540                GNHDV                    11
                ROPS               Robinia pseudoacacia                                    660                  GLTR                    6
                SAPA               Sabal palmetto                                          520                PRACM                     3
                SCMO               Schinus molle                                           650                 UGEB                     1
                SCTE               Schinus terebinthifolius                                650                 UGEB                     1
                SESE               Sequoia sempervirens                                    360                GNSWCL                  5,B
                SWMA               Swietenia mahagoni                                      750                 GNTRC                    2
                SYRO               Syagrus romanzoffiana                                   370                PRACM                     3
                TAAR               Tabebuia aurea                                          520                 GNTRC                    2
                TACH               Tabebuia ochracea subsp.                                960                 GNTRC                    2
                                    neochrysantha
                TAPA               Tabebuia heterophylla                                 520                   GNTRC                    2
                THOR               Platycladus orientalis                                527                    UGEC                    1
                TIAM               Tilia americana                                       320                    TICO                    6
                TICO               Tilia cordata                                         420                    TICO                    6
                TITO               Tilia tomentosa                                       320                    TICO                    6
                TRCO               Tristaniopsis conferta                                750                    UGEB                    1
                TRSE6              Triadica sebifera                                     520                    UGEB                    1
                UGEB               Urban general broadleaf                             DRYADc                   UGEB                    1
                UGEC               Urban general conifer                               DRYADc                   UGEC                    1
                ULAL               Ulmus alata                                           600                    ULPU                    6
                ULAM               Ulmus americana                                       460                   ULAM                     6
                ULPA               Ulmus parvifolia                                      730                    ULPA                    8
                ULPU               Ulmus pumila                                          540                    ULPU                    6
                UMCA               Umbellularia californica                              510                   UMCA                     7
                VEME               Veitchia merrillii                                    370                   PRACM                    3
                WAFI               Washingtonia filifera                                 370                   PRACM                    3
                WARO               Washingtonia robusta                                  370                   PRACM                    3
                ZESE               Zelkova serrata                                       520                    ZESE                    8
                Notes: Species without a specific equation or dry-weight density factor are matched to known species. N/A = not applicable.
                a
                  DW density = dry-weight biomass kilograms per cubic meter.
                b
                  Equation source: 1 = Aguaron and McPherson 2012, 2 = Chave et al. 2005, 3 = Frangi and Lugo 1985, 4 = Harris et al. 1973, 5
                = Jenkins et al. 2004, 6 = Lefsky and McHale 2008, 7 = Pillsbury and Kirkley 1984, 8 = Pillsbury et al. 1998, 9 = Ter-Mikaelian
                and Korzukhin 1997, 10 = Van et al. 2000, 11 = Vieilledent et al. 2012, A = minus Jenkins foliage, B = minus foliage ratio.
                c
                  For equations UGEC and UGEB, look up correct dry-weight density factor for species of interest in DRYAD (the Global Wood
                Density Database).




78
                                                                           Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




Example 2. Calculating dry-weight biomass and carbon stored based on either cal-
culated or measured d.b.h. and/or tree height.
    Once d.b.h. and height have been measured or calculated (as in example 1), the
next step entails using either d.b.h. or d.b.h. and height to calculate the dry-weight
biomass. For species assigned biomass equations, skip to example 3. For species
assigned volumetric equations, follow this example.
    In this example, we continue with a sample tree Liquidambar styraciflua
(sweetgum) located in the Northern California Coast region. It is 33 years of age
and has an estimated d.b.h. equal to 42.2 cm and tree height equal to 15.3 m, as
calculated in example 1.

Step 1. Select the equation for d.b.h. and height to calculate aboveground fresh
wood volume (table 9). Fresh-wood volume in cubic meters (V) for a 15.3-m tall
sweetgum with a 42.2-cm d.b.h. is calculated as:
     V = 0.0000631 × (42.2) 2.31582 × (15.1) 0.41571 = 1.13 m3		
     Note that the volumetric equations are not region specific, so the fact that our
sample tree is located in the Northern California Coast region does not play a role in
this example. If the tree had not been measured and we were predicting d.b.h. and/
or ht from age or d.b.h., we would need to select a region-specific growth equation.

Step 2. Convert from fresh-wood volume to dry-weight biomass by multiplying V
by the species-specific DW density factor, which for sweetgum is 460 kg/m3 (from
table 9)
    DW = 1.13 m3 × 460 kg/m3 = 519.80 kg

Step 3. Thus far, we have calculated the biomass for the aboveground portion of
the tree. To convert from DW biomass to carbon stored, the belowground biomass
should be incorporated. The biomass stored belowground is calculated by multiply-
ing the DW biomass by 1.28:
     Total DW = 519.80 kg × 1.28 = 665.34 kg

Step 4. Next, the DW biomass is converted into kilograms of carbon (C) by multi-
plying by the constant 0.5:
    C = 665.34 kg × 0.5 = 332.67 kg

Step 5. Convert stored carbon into stored carbon dioxide (CO2) by multiplying by
the constant 3.67 as follows:
     CO2 = 332.67 kg × 3.67 = 1220.89 kg
     Note that in this case, results were rounded at each step. Users will achieve
slightly different results when using Excel or programming language to calculate
the final amounts.

                                                                                                                    79
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                          Example 3. Estimating DW biomass directly from tree size parameters.
                              In this variation of example 2, we measure a Liriodendron tulipifera, which has
                          a d.b.h. of 35.0 cm. Select the equation from table 10 for estimating the direct DW
                          biomass of this species. The calculation is as follows:
                              DW = 0.0365 × (35.0)2.7324- e (-4.0813+5.8816/35.0) = 604.4 kg
                              where e is a mathematical constant equal to 2.71828182845904.
                              To estimate total DW, total carbon stored, and CO2 stored, continue with steps 3
                          through 5 in example 2.

                          Error in Predicting Future Growth, Carbon, and Biomass
                          The volume equations were developed from trees that may differ in size from
                          the trees in the user’s sample or inventory. The d.b.h. ranges for trees sampled to
                          develop the volume and biomass equations are listed in columns labelled “Dbh
                          lower (cm)” and “Dbh upper (cm)” (tables 9 and 10). Applying the equations to trees
                          with d.b.h. outside of this range may increase the prediction error. Tree growth
                          as modelled or estimated by the user may deviate significantly from tree growth
                          models generalized here. In general, it is better to err on the side of underestimating
                          carbon stocks rather than overestimating. Recommended ways of evaluating the
                          growth data presented here include contacting local arborists and other tree experts
                          (e.g., university extension offices, city tree managers) or from repeated measure-
                          ments of inventoried trees.

                          Case Study
                          To demonstrate the species-level differences in d.b.h., tree height, and total carbon
                          across regions, we selected the top three species most commonly measured in the
                          17 reference cities (16 reference cities and SacVal): Acer saccharinum (silver maple),
                          Liquidambar styraciflua (sweetgum), and Magnolia grandiflora (southern magno-
                          lia). We estimated the d.b.h., tree height, and total carbon at 10-year intervals up to
                          the maximum age recommended for the application of the developed equations (i.e.,
                          “AppMax”). Silver maple was measured in 7 reference cities, southern magnolia in
                          8 cities, and sweetgum in 12 cities.
                               At age 40, the oldest age for which data were available across regions, the
                          estimated total carbon stored in silver maple was between 378.1 kg in the Northeast
                          and 4505.6 kg in the Midwest regions, an 11-fold difference (fig. 17). Estimated
                          d.b.h range was between 34.8 cm in Northeast and 101.6 cm in the Midwest; tree
                          height ranged from 13.3 m in Northeast and 23.4 m in Midwest (table 12). The
                          growth patterns of silver maple are similar in three regions: Inland Valley, North,
                          Tropical Interior West and Lower Midwest, where there is only a twofold difference
                          at age 40. Over the same time period, the quickest accumulation of carbon in silver
80
                                                                                     Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




                             Climate zone
                      9000
                                 InlVal
                      8000       LoMidW
                                 MidWst
                                 NMtnPr
                      7000
                                 NoEast




  Total carbon (kg)
                                 Peidmt
                      6000       TpIntW

                      5000

                      4000

                      3000

                      2000

                      1000

                         0

                             0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150
                                                      Age


Figure 17—Total stored carbon by age for silver maple in regions where it was measured.



maple occurred in the Midwest and South. Silver maple growing in the Northeast is
on the lowest trajectory for carbon stored, amounting to only 1222.3 kg at the oldest
age for which the growth equations could be applied, age 150.
     Of the regions and reference cities in which sweetgum is planted abundantly,
the highest amount of carbon stored was in the southeastern region of the United
States followed by regions in California (Northern California Coast; Inland Valleys
including Sacramento Valley; Inland Empire) (fig. 18). Sweetgum in the Northeast
and Southern California Coast stored noticeably less carbon than in the other
regions as trees grew older. At age 60, the difference between highest and lowest
estimates of carbon storage was ninefold, ranging from 238.6 kg in Southern Cali-
fornia Coast (d.b.h. = 37.3; tree height = 13.3 m) to 5451.5 kg in the South region
(d.b.h. = 121.4 cm; tree height = 34.8 m (fig. 18; table 13).
     The regional differences in total carbon stored by magnolia become evident
within 30 years of planting, with trees in Central Florida, South (Piedmont), Coastal
Plain, and Sacramento Valley increasing at a faster rate than in Southern California
Coast, Northern California Coast, and Inland Valleys (fig. 19). It takes magnolia
approximately 30 additional years in Northern California Coast to attain similar
levels of total carbon storage amount as in Central Florida and South regions. By
age 50, the oldest age for which estimates were available across regions, magnolia is

                                                                                                                              81
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




                                                6000
                                                                                                      Climate zone
                                                5500                                                     CenFla
                                                                                                         GulfCo
                                                5000
                                                                                                         InlEmp
                                                4500                                                     InlVal
                                                                                                         NoCalC




                            Total carbon (kg)
                                                4000                                                     NoEast
                                                                                                         PacfNW
                                                3500
                                                                                                         Peidmt
                                                3000                                                     SacVal
                                                                                                         SoCalC
                                                2500                                                     TpIntW
                                                2000
                                                1500
                                                1000
                                                 500
                                                   0

                                                       0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150
                                                                                 Age


                          Figure 18—Total stored carbon by age for sweetgum in regions where it was measured.




                                                           Climate zone
                                                2500
                                                             CenFla
                                                             GulfCo
                                                             InlEmp
                                                2000         InlVal
                                                             NoCalC
                                                             Peidmt




                            Total carbon (kg)
                                                             SacVal
                                                1500         SoCalC




                                                1000



                                                 500



                                                   0

                                                       0    10   20   30   40   50     60   70   80   90    100    110
                                                                                 Age


                          Figure 19—Total stored carbon by age for southern magnolia in regions where it was measured.

82
                                                                             Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




expected to accumulate six times more carbon in the Central Florida (1596.2 kg)
than in the Inland Valleys region (271.9 kg), nearly a sixfold difference. Estimated
d.b.h ranged from 41.2 cm (tree height = 12.2 m) in the Inland Valleys to 97.8 cm in
Central Florida region (tree height = 15.7 m) (table 14).
     Species that are highly abundant in the reference cities (i.e., silver maple, sweet-
gum, and magnolia) accumulated carbon at a higher rate in the southeastern regions
of the Unites States, namely South, Central Florida, and Coastal Plain regions. The
ability of trees to store a large amount of carbon in the southeastern United States
is likely due in part to the combination of high precipitation (>1300 mm per year),
high temperatures in the summer and relatively warm temperatures in the winter
(cooling degree days [CDD] > 847; heating degree days [HDD] < 2000), and long
growing seasons. Central Florida, for example, has low HDD and high CDD, signi-
fying a warm climate year round, where cooling would be required in the summers,
but heating would not be needed as much in the winter.
     Another region in which our case study species have accumulated relatively
large amounts of carbon is the Midwest. This is surprising owing to the shorter
growing seasons and cooler temperatures. One factor that likely played a role was
the lack of limitations on growing space in Minneapolis, Minnesota. Very few sites
had visible limitations on growth. In contrast, in Queens, New York city, only 44
percent of the sites had no apparent limitations. The species analyzed in our case
study accumulated consistently less carbon in Queens than in the other reference
cities. Santa Monica, reference city for the Southern California Coast region, also
had lower estimates of carbon storage by sweetgum, likely resulting from too heavy
pruning owing to hazard potentials (e.g., trees planted very close to curbs on busy
commercial boulevards) (personal communication, P. Peper). Additional regions
that had lower total carbon storage were the Inland Empire, Inland Valleys, and
Lower Midwest. Although the inland regions of California have many warm days
conducive to plant growth, low precipitation can result in high evaporative demand.
Prolonged drought stress can restrict tree growth and carbon storage (Anderegg et
al. 2015). For example, in the Inland Valleys region, CDD is 3153 mm, but annual
precipitation is only 315 mm, most of which comes during the leaf-off season.




                                                                                                                      83
GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




        Table 12—Diameter at breast height (d.b.h.) and tree height estimates for Acer saccharinum in
        regions where these species were measured

                     Inland             Lower                                                                                Temperate
        Age          Valleys          Midwest              Midwest         North        Northeast           South          Interior West
        Year           - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Diameter at breast height (cm) - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
        0               2.5                 1.4                  2.2          2.8            2.2                1.3                   4
        10             19                 10                   22.5          19.6          16.5               22.4                   15.2
        20             35.5               23.5                 52.6          35.5          24.8               43.5                  28.4
        30             52                 36.2                 81.4          50.3          30.4               64.6                  42.8
        40             68.5               48                  101.6          64.2          34.8               85.7                   57.9
        50             85                 58.9                               77.2          38.4             106.7                   72.8
        60            101.5               69.1                               89.1           41.5            127.8                   87
        70            118                 78.7                              100.1          44.1                                      99.7
        80                                87.8                              110.2          46.5                                    110.3
        90                                96.4                              119.2          48.7                                    118
        100                             104.7                               127.3          50.6                                    122.2
        110                             112.6                               134.4          52.4
        120                             120.1                               140.6          54.1
        130                                                                                55.7
        140                                                                                 57.1
        150                                                                                58.5

                       - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Tree height (m) - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
        0               2.2                 1.3                  3                 2.8            2                    2.6                    6.4
        10             10.6                 6.9                 10.4              11.2            9.1                  8.7                    9.3
        20             14.7                11.2                 18.3             15              11.3                13.7                   12.4
        30             17.5                13.8                 22.5              17.5           12.5                 17.8                  15.4
        40             19.8                15.7                 23.4              19.3           13.3                20.9                   18.1
        50             21.6                17.1                                  20.8            13.9                23                     20.4
        60             23.2                18.2                                   21.9           14.4                24.2                   22.1
        70             24.5                19.2                                  22.9            14.8                                       23.3
        80                                20                                     23.7            15.2                                       24
        90                                20.7                                   24.4            15.5                                       24.4
        100                                21.3                                  24.9            15.7                                       24.6
        110                                21.9                                  25.4            16
        120                               22.4                                   25.8            16.2
        130                                                                                      16.4
        140                                                                                      16.6
        150                                                                                      16.7




84
     Table 13—Diameter at breast height (d.b.h.) and tree height estimates for Liquidambar styraciflua in regions where these species were measured

              Central         Coastal           Inland           Inland                                Northern          Pacific            Sacramento                              Southern              Temperate
     Age      Florida           Plain          Empire            Valleys          Northeast            CA Coast        Northwest                Valley               South          CA Coast            Interior West
     Year       - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Diameter at breast height (cm) - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     0          0.9               2.6              2.5              2.5                 3.4                 2.8            2                       3.7                 2.3               1.8                    2.8
     10        21.9             24.5              15.1             14.5               12.1                 15.4           18.4                   20.4                 18.7              14.9                  13.7
     20        41               42.9             26.4              26.4               20.2                 27.4          34.8                    35.3                 39.3             22.3                   26.1
     30        56.2             58               36.3              38.4               27.8                 38.9           51.3                   48.4                 59.8              27.4                  36.8
     40        68.9             69.7             45                50.3               35                   49.7           67.7                   59.6                 80.3              31.4                  46.1
     50        80.1             77.9             52.4              62.3               41.6                 59.9                                  69                 100.8               34.6                  53.8
     60        90               82.8             58.4              74.2               47.7                 69.5                                  76.5               121.4               37.3                  60
     70        99                                63.2                                 53.4                 78.5                                  82.2                                   39.7                  64.7
     80                                          66.6                                 58.5                 87                                    86                                     41.9                  67.9
     90                                          68.8                                 63.1                 94.8                                  88.1                                   43.8
     100                                          69.6                                67.2               102                                                                            45.5
     110                                          69.6                                70.8
     120                                          69.6                                73.9
     130                                          69.6                                76.5
     140                                          69.6                                78.6
     150                                                                              80.1
                 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Tree height (m) - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     0          0.6               1.8              2.9              4.8                 2.7                 2.3            2.4                     3.5                  1.8              2.6                    1.6
     10          9.9            12.7               9.2              7.9                 5.9                 8.4            9.5                   10                   12.6               7.3                    8.1
     20        13.6              17.7            12.9              11.1                 8.5                12.4           14.5                   15.2                 19.9               9.6                  12.9
     30        15.7             20.7              15.2             14.2               10.6                 14.8           17.6                   19.2                 24.9              11                    16.2
     40        17.2             22.7              16.6             17.4               12.3                 16.3           18.6                   22.2                 28.8              12                    18.6
     50        18.3             23.9              17.7             20.5               13.7                 17.3                                  24.5                 32                12.7                  20.3
     60        19.2             24.6              18.6             23.7               14.9                 18                                    26.1                 34.8              13.3                  21.6
     70        19.9                               19.4                                15.9                 18.8                                  27.3                                   13.8                  22.5
     80                                          20                                   16.8                 19.8                                  28                                     14.2                  23.1
     90                                          20.5                                  17.6                21.1                                  28.3                                   14.6
     100                                         20.6                                 18.3                 22.7                                                                         14.9
     110                                         20.6                                 18.9
     120                                         20.6                                 19.4
     130                                         20.6                                 19.9
     140                                         20.6                                 20.2
     150                                                                              20.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Urban Tree Database and Allometric Equations




85
86   Table 14—Diameter at breast height (d.b.h.) and tree height estimates for Magnolia grandiflora in regions where these
     species were measured

                                                                                                                                        Northern
              Central Coastal Inland                         Inland          Lower                                                     California Sacramento
     Age      Florida          Plain         Empire Valleys Midwest Midwest North Northeast                                               Coast                Valley            South
     Year   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Diameter at breast height (cm) - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     0            3              2.5            2.2            2.5              3.1            3.1        3.1             3.1                3                    1.2               3.1
     10          21.2           14.7           13.3           10.3            14.5            14.5       14.5           14.5                 7.7                18.8              14.5
     20          41.6           26.9           21.9           18              27.9            27.9       27.9           27.9               14.1                 32.4              27.9
     30          59.4           39.1           29.3           25.7            43.2            43.2       43.2           43.2               22.3                 42.6              43.2
     40          74.7           51.3           36.7           33.5            60.5            60.5      60.5            60.5               32.3                 50.9              60.5
     50          87.5           63.5           45.6           41.2            79.6            79.6       79.6           79.6               44.1                  57.9             79.6
                                                                                                                                                                                          GENERAL TECHNICAL REPORT PSW-GTR-253




     60          97.8                          57.1           49                                                                           57.6                 64.1
     70        105.5                           72.6                                                                                        72.9                 69.6
     80                                                                                                                                    90.1                 74.6
     90                                                                                                                                                          79.2
     100                                                                                                                                                        83.4
     110                                                                                                                                                         87.4
               - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Tree height (m) - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     0            1.1            1.2            2.8             1.8             1.6            1.6        1.6             1.6                1.9                  0.7               1.6
     10           6.6            5.7             5.6            4.4             6.1            6.1        6.1             6.1                4.1                  8                 6.1
     20          10.3             9.2            7.5            6.8           10.5            10.5       10.5           10.5                 6                  10.8              10.5
     30          12.7           11.8            8.9             8.9           14.4            14.4       14.4           14.4                 7.8                12.4              14.4
     40          14.4           13.5           10.2           10.7            17.3            17.3       17.3           17.3                 9.4                13.4               17.3
     50          15.7           14.2           11.4           12.2            18.7            18.7       18.7           18.7               10.8                  14.3             18.7
     60          16.5                          12.5           13.5                                                                         12.1                  14.9
     70          16.5                          13.2                                                                                        13.3                  15.5
     80                                                                                                                                    14.5                  15.9
     90                                                                                                                                                         16.3
     100                                                                                                                                                        16.7
     110                                                                                                                                                         17
This publication is available online at www.fs.fed.us/psw/.

           Pacific Southwest Research Station
                   800 Buchanan Street
                    Albany, CA 94710
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Pacific Southwest Research Station
800 Buchanan Street
Albany, CA 94710
Official Business
Penalty for Private Use, $300
